 

Com‘a‘:mr.rn'o;-2 Commz'rIee
Geraicl H. Anderson
_ Chairnl-an '
SL':.u'ritf College
Donald M. Wodurz, S.S.C.
Vice—C|1airmrm
Saint Col11mh;1n’s Semimuy
Raiph D. \ViniC1‘
Secretary-”l‘1'easm'er _
Fuiler 'I‘heologica1 Seminary
135 N. Oakland Avenue
Pasadena, C'.Llifo1'11i'.1 91 101
R. Pierce Beaver
John'I.Bobcrg,S.V}D.
E. Luther Copeland
William J. Dtmker
Arthul‘ F. Glasser
Per lisssing
J. Herbert Kane
George W. Peters
James H. Pyke

Holland where they decided to postpone a decision about a new journal they were
sidering until after their next meeting in 1971M
concerning the future of the LEE will be made until the end of this year or posawmg
when the CWME meets in Bangkok in January. '

I \

AMERHQEN 3‘3®$EET‘{ GF ﬁd§ES3EC§LC3£Eh"'

(in process of forrruaiiorzl
August 30, 1972

Dr. Alan R. Tippett

School of World Mission
Fuller Theological Seminary
l35 North Oakland Avenue
Pasadena, California 91101

Dear Alan:

I was pleased to find your 27 July letter on my desk when I
arrived back from vacation this week. It is encouraging to know
of your willingness and ability to serve as editor of the proposed
new journal of mission studies to be sponsored by the American
Society of Missiology. We are also grateful to Fuller Theologim
cal Seminary for its willingness to assist in the provision of
your editorial services for this project.

I have just returned from the meeting of the LAMS in

  
 

I heard that no definite deeir’

Therefore it seems to me i.:.hc :t"i.:-'_-Lid

wide open. for us to move ahead and meet a widely felt need. for a.d.di.tio:r1a.l pe1,:‘I0rl'_i.r’:a1'J
literature of a scholarly nature that would be of usefulness not only to scholars
such as Professors of Missions but also to those engaged in actual missionary service

overseas ..

The big remaining question, however, is that of finances We do have

enough encouragement in this regard that I think we should tentatively lay plans
for launching the journal in early 1973, subject to a final decision within the

next 60 days.

I expect to have word within 30 days about a grant from The United

Methodist Board of Missions World Division for the journal and I have received pres
lnminary unofficial word that we can likely count on a favorable reply.

The first two issues of a new journal would be exceedingly

important in establishing its reputation and setting a level or tone as to its
scope and scholarship, as well as format and design,

While I think of it let me report that George Peters told

me in Holland that William Reyburn who spoke at our meeting there told him that

act t

might be willing to consider some sort of deal with us whereby we would. inherit

y is likely to cease publication in the near future and they

their subscription list in return for some commitment from us that our new journal

would carry forward a section or regular interest in missiionary anthropology ,, You
probably know the editors of that journal better than anyone and 1'. would. suggest

that you might want to explore this.

I am enclosing a copy of the paper read by William Du

Reyburn at the Holland meeting, "Secular Culture and S1Ji..ri1‘.r1aIi. VE1l11eS'=""..{\ Six

Continent View,

which I felt was the best paper 1fc.a.1«'? at Eihe ("Don 'Fr"'a"m'1r1e 9 wf'11'cI': '-_:c>:,:.

  

 

 

":77 7 Dr. A; R. Tippett _ c I" ~ 2'  ' d August 30, :i_'97'2

. might want to consider for publication in the journal.- You should contact Reyburn,

 

.f7hQf_however,.for permission to publish it and also he may want to make some revisions_'

-in light of-critical comments during the discussion at the Conference. also en“
closed is a report that was given on ”Missiology in the Netherlands,” which I be~
lieve.would merit publication in the journal also, though probably not_in the first
issue. iIt is very well done and the author told me he would be glad to have it
published in our journal. '

, . I have not yet written to the persons who were proposed for
membership on the editorial board, to serve in an advisory capacity to the editor.
These persons were: Beaver, Forman, Peters, Shepherd, Guy, Luzbetek, Hillman,
Dulles, Katherine Hockin (Canada), Wi Jo Rang, James Scherer, and myself. Can you
or Ralph provide me with addresses for Shepherd, Luzbetek, Hillman, Dulles, and
Hockin? I will prepare a letter and send immediately to those whose addresses 1

shave and to the others as soon as I get the addresses from you. I think it will

be very important in all aspects of our work on the journal, including the nature

IV _of manuscripts published as well as contributors of material, that we seek to

maintain a balance among the three traditions represented in our supporting con~

stituency, namely, conservative evangelicals, Roman Catholics and ecumenical
Frotestants (an inadequate designation, I recognize). I know you are sensitive
to these matters.

I mentioned to Ralph Winter in June here that you might
want to try to get an article for the first issue of the journal from Rs Pierce
Beaver. He gave a series of lectures in Asia two years ago tracing the history of
the Christian attitude and approach to men of other faiths which he hopes to work
into a book_in the near future. This is always a subject of great interest and
relevance for our work and perhaps he could do something along this line that would
be very appropriate for the initial issue of the journal. I personally feel that
a good section of book reviews would be of greatest importance and value._ There

_ might also be a-place for some brief items of news and comments about conferences,

Enclosures

meetings, symposia, historical collections, other publications, and personal nos
tices, such as are included in The Catholic Historical Review. We will also want
to be in touch with publishers and others about advertising. As soon as a decision
is made to move ahead, I would be glad to contact Abingdon here about an ad in the
first issue. Of course, we have the whole question of a title for the journal to
be decided. What are your thoughts on this? I am quite open on the subject but
would be inclined toward something rather simple and straightforward, such as,
JOURNAL OF MISSIOLOGY or §lSSIOLOGY—~AN INTERNATIONAL EEVEEWO

I look forward to working with you on this important venture

and am exceedingly grateful for your willingness to give it your creative leadership.

Very cordially yours,

.i_7
”2‘\,},.>/' _/I. L.../I
Gera¥d H. Anderson
GHa:K - r ,3
Copies to Dr. Ralph Winter

Era Donald Wodarz

 

git 1 ,.

-5 1 ‘.33’-’r
'4(j:'2:f1_l-,»»':.«:='?(ﬁ .

,7"  '  

  

