Continuation Committee
Gerald H. Anderson

Ch aérm an .
Searritt College

Donald M. Wodarz, S.S.C. -

Viee—Ch3irrnan_
Saint Colu1nban’s Seminary

Ralph D. Winter

Secretary-Treasurer

Fuiier Theoiogical Seminary
135 N. Oakland Avenue
Pasadena, Ca1iforni21'91101

R. Pierce Beaver
John T.’ -Boberg, S.V.D.
E. Luther Copeland-

-Wiliiam I. Danker

Arthur F. Glasser
Per Hassing
J. Herbert Kane

George W. Peters
James H. Pyke

AMERIQN SOCIETY OF MISSIOLOGY

{in process of formation}

August 3Q,.1972

Professor Charles W. Forman
The-Diviniﬁy $choo1

Yale University

439 Prospect Street

New Haven, Gonnecﬁicut Q5313

ﬁeax Charles:

I appreciate your 13 August letter and the enclosures which
I found on my éesk upon returning from vacation this week.‘ Many
thanks for-your suggestions and also for the~reprinte of your
articles. E am sorry to heat about the automobile aoeiﬂent ium
'vo1ving your wife and daughter, and'I true: they are wail on their
way to full recovery. ' ' i '

As you will eee-from the encloseé news release,_the Amenican
Society of Mieeiology was launched in e meeting.1aet June at
ﬁcarritt College by profeasors of mieeioo ané others interested in
studying the missionary eimeneion of the Christian Churoh; One of

- the notable ﬁeaturee-of the A,S;M. is the Eaet that it has attracted

and seeks to inc1ude_within its membership a broad range of theologi-
cal and church't$aditione, and this eyread of repreeentation is inw
dieated in pert on this letterheaé in the membership of the Romain»
uation ﬂommittee that is seeking to oarry forward sane of the conw
eerne ana comitmence of this new Society. -

. The A.SeM. is proposing to launch a scho1er1y'journa1 of
mieeiology in 1973; Dr. Alan R. Tippett, Professor of Missionary
Anthropology at the Graduate School of world Miseion_o£ Fuller
Theological Seminary, has agreed to eerve as editor; ”' '

é _= The purpose of_this letter is to invite.you to serve as a
member of the editorial boaro of the new journe1;_ The eﬂitoriel
board of twelve pereons'wi11 serve in an advisory capacity to the
editor, and the edi:or‘io turn will feel free to call upon members
of the boaxd.£or counsel as to the general editorial policies of
the journal as well as for such epeeifie taske.ae reviewing manu~
scripts that are eubmitteﬂ ﬁe: publication which are in the specia1=
Eielo of interest of the respective board_members. We hope that

"members of the editoxial hoeté would feel a special sense of respon-

sibility for promoting the ﬁournal among their associates and for
contributing to it fro Eheié own research and writing. rWe_wou1d
hope to arrange for an enqgo fmeeting of the eﬁitorial heard at .'
the "time anal place of the éﬁﬂﬁél meeting;_ of the A.53'.'M. I hope

Prafeasar C. W. Fexmam ~ 2 W August 33, 1972

mm may gaunt om year wi11ia3n@$$ ta caaperate in thig impoﬂant mew venture which
a u Gn1y'aerve to atyemgthan tha nausa mi warld mi3si0n stuéiea on an ecumenical
baaia. 3 look faywaxd ta hearing from you aﬁ yam? early csnveniemce.

 

Sikh every good wigh and warm péraenal regards, I remain

ﬁoréially y0uE$,

  

Geréﬁﬁ H. Ag%arsan

{a
Chairman
Cantiﬁuatien Gammittee

ﬂﬁézﬁ

Enc1G$uxe

