March 22, 1072 Draft

Dear fellow missiologistz

You ea be one who would like to he oresent at the first meetin of those who are
Y 1 E

concerned to form a proposed ASH:

Nashville (Scarritt College for Christian Workers)

19th Avenue South at Grand, Friday, 5:30 p.m. dinner, June 9, through lunch Satur-

day, June 10.

I.

Cost $8.00 lodging and meals, plus $2.00 registration.

The Call

THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MISSIOLOGY will be a vital fellowship of all those
seriously involved in the urgent, on—going scholarly discussion taking place
across this world at this very.moment among all those of any Christian tradi~
tion who are dedicated to the fulfillment of the Great Commission——quite
specifically that task of reaching out cross—culturally to those who have
never accepted the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

A.

This is to be more than a group of professors of missions-—the phrase

"all those seriously involved in the...discussion” goes beyond the
Professors of Missions groups already existing. Like other scholarly
societies, membership will not be based on certain academic credentials

but upon some recognized competence or relevant experience plus a

readiness to uphold the society's aims. This usually means, at a minimum,
paying the annual membership fee, subscribing to the journal of the society,
reading, writing, attending meetings when possible.

Those receiving this letter may do well immediately to try to spread the
word of the June meeting to all those university professors, mission execu—
tives, church officials, pastors, etc. who are thought to belong among
"those who now or now choose to be involved....” Write for more copies

of this letter or send me names and addresses, etc.

Some may ask, does missiology include home missions, back fence evangelism,
or just the task traditionally conceived of as "foreign missions“? This
will have to be on the agenda in June. My personal feeling is that while
the word itself, in its root meaning, includes {by metaphorical extension)
any kind of “sent” actiVity—~e.g. "my mission today is to clean up this
kitchen”—«nevertheless mission {a Latin word) has for at least 16 centuries
been applied chiefly by‘ChriEtians to the propagation of the Gospel at a
distance, usually meaning both geographical and cultural distance. And,
since the -ology suffix gains its greatest significance from the bristling
complexities introduced by the cross—cultura1 dimension, I would therefore
imagine that the bulk of the discussion defining our society would fall
into the traditional sphere. Since we are now more than ever aware of

the many sub-cultures within the U.S. (African, Spanish, Indian, etc.)

the word would—~even in its narrowest definition——inc1ude a great deal of
"home missions,” (but it would cover this type of home missions from a
serious, cross—cultura1 perspective]. Note: See Beaver’s comment below.

Those whose names accompany this first general letter have no claim on the
control of the society (which like other scholary societies, will be
democratically run) but are merely people who have in one way or another
discussed this proposal. If this word is the first you have heard, please
don't feel slightedg we are well aware of many sectors in which no one

has had a chance to pass the word unofficially.

-2-

Other letters will go out, April 20, and May 20, indicating the accumulat~
ing names [and positions) of those who have by those dates signified their
(1) interest and support but inability to attend, and (2) those who will
definitely attend. Please get your name to me in time to be included in
the letter.

Ralph D. Winter
135 North Oakland Avenue
Pasadena, California 91101

II. First Addendum, March 22, 1972

A.

The text of section I is, for all its defects, to be blamed on the one
whose name appears at its foot. However, the persons below have seen

this letter and in one way or another have indicated their general approval.
A number of their suggestions have been incorporated into the text.

Donald H. Wodarz
Dr. Per Uassing

Dr. Gerald H. Anderson
Dr. R. Pierce Beaver
Dr. Arthur F. Glasser
Dr. J. Herbert Kane

Louis J. Luzhotak,.S.V.D.
Dr. H. Wilbert Norton

Dr. George W. Peters

Dr. James A. Scherer

Three general responses from this group are as follows:

James Scherer - I share in the conviction that Christian forces in America
badly need a broadly based, confessionally inclusive society not only for
the study of contemporary missionary challenges and opportunities, but
also as a rallying point for those who remain committed to the ongoing
tasks of world mission in all six continents. I would like to express the
fervent hope that the new American Society of Hissiology might, by the
grace of God, fulfill that noble goal.

Donald Wodarz and For Hassing ~ The proposal of the foundation of a society
for mission studies meets a much felt need among many who, for various -us.
reasons, devote themselves to the study of the missionary effort of the
Christian Church. There is no doubt that there is a need for a wide base
of potential support for such a society. We believe that its membership
should be open to all who are seriously interested in the scholarly study
of missions, whether they be missions professors, students, missionary
institutes, cultural anthropologists, secular as well as church historians,
missionaries, retired missionaries, etc. The proposed society should have
a base wide enough to accomodate persons of diverse scholarly interests and
backgrounds.

R. Pierce Beaver — The communication of the gospel, the planting of new
churches, and assistance to young growing Christian communities {i.e.,
assistance which is brotherly, not paternalistic; stimulating, not stifling)
require the pooling of the knowledge, understanding, skills, and techniques
provided by the many fields of the social sciences, linguistics, communica—
tions, and by a wide range of practical professions, such as agriculture,
education, medicine and public health as well as devoted witness in all its
forms. Missiology, or the study of mission, must today embrace all these
various elements and bring them into united service to the church in its
central task of discipling the nations. A professional society of mis-
siologists should be broadly inclusive of persons representing all the
sciences, technical fields, and arts which can illuminate and empower the

Dr. William Nigel Kerr

-3-

mission today. Personal commitment to mission is as important as special-
ized knowledge and skill. Pﬁssion administrators should be involved in
such a society. A limited number of serious nonprofessionals—«misSionaries,
pastors, 1aymen~—who recognize the urgency and value of professional action
and wish to make their contribution to it should be welcomed into
membership.

R. Pierce Beaver — Do not open the door to just anybody who interprets
“mission” to mean Christian vocation or the everyday witness which any
Christian should make in his own place. Let us stick primarily to
”diSCip1ihﬁ the nations" and.cross~cultura1 communication of our faith,
but say that our concern includes such situations within our national
borders. This present statement opens the way, I fear, to the prevailing
contemporary definition of mission as witness and service to the world

on one's own doorstep.

C. The names listed in II. A. are those who have actually reviewed the text
of Section I. Hany, many others of you have participated in the discussions
leading up to this letter. All of you and others besides are now invited
to respond in any way, and your response will be recorded in Section llI
in the April letter.

D. The very name, American Society of Hissiology, while it has been the
handle by which the discussion during the past year and a half has been
conducted, is not necessarily final.

E. It must be clarified, as a result of preliminary inquiries, that this society

is not to be considered the continuation of any other society past or
present. It is quite possible that the June:neeting will definitely
propose the formation of a society as well as appoint committees to under-
take some of the essential tasks of organization. Some of these committees
may meet Saturday afternoon. Then, it is possible that a later "ratifying"
meeting will be necessary. If so, I am wondering if it would not be
possible to do this in a meeting at the time of the International Congress
of Learned Societies in the Field of Religion, in Los Angeles, September
l~5, 1972. This will then make possible a first issue of a society Journal
during the first quarter of 1973.

F. In regard to the establishment of a scholarly society the American

Council of Learned Societies has some very helpful materials. Also, the
American Association of University Presses has an excellent Handbook of
Scholarly Journal Publications. he do well to note that there now exists
Efwhole flurry of engaging new approaches to the essential flow of scholarly
conversation within a society such as this one. Hopefully we can stand
upon the latest, best advice in all these areas.

'3

u. Please send comments; please tell us (1) if you will attend, (2) if not,
if you want to get the next (April 20) letter to see how interest is

developing.
Cordially,

Ralph D. Winter

RDH:lh

