V
w

 

fa- (K ‘ ﬂ 4 g__ _ J October 30, 1973
/ ,2  ch. 
“x.ﬁ—C  m:_,.,-_-.c.. ’ ,z  ’  «"1 ‘'—r'-/ "9; 0

Dear Gerald,

I just got a renewal notice for Qccasional Bulletin_and that jogged
my mind regarding the deliberations concerning the merger of this
Bulletin with Missiology.

Is thenato be a merger? Are they going ahead collecting subscriptions
for the coming year. I don't see any problem unless coordination at
some point would be helpful.

We'll have to work out a financial settlement inevitably as we did
with P.A.

Possibly they intend to start in 1974. Is that a possibility?

Tippett says that the third issue will be ready any time now. I
haven't seen it yet. The crushing news is that the shortages that
have bedeviled our whole economy have invaded the printing industry
as well and Edwards Bros. who have always been the most disciplined
faithful people are now running two and a half months instead of
one month on jobs of the sort we're giving them. This means instead
of getting our stuff back at the end of September, we're getting
the second issue on the 13th of November they now inform us. This
is so absolutely shocking that 1 can hardly believe this will be
the same for the third issue. But it will likely be somewhere in
between the one month which they have always done before and the
two and a half months of this special period of problems. I don‘t
know exactly how to react to this except that I simply do not know
what I can do about it. I really think the quality of our product
is going to have to outlast the inconveniences and bruised expecta~
tions of the present hour. I do think however we can at least try
to explain what the trouble is.

This brings me to the matter of sending out a special newsletter just
to the charter members. We decided in our June meeting that news items
could be contained in the Journal itself. But one little problem we
overlooked was the fact that many of our charter members have not
somehow gotten the right cues in regard to subscribing to the Journal
and thus will not be getting any further news, and we are getting
perhaps a dozen letters in the last two months asking what‘s happened
since the $10 was sent in. It seems to me it would be easier to
write a letter of cheerful character to our whole CM list urging them
to send in their $8 so as to get on the bandwagon with the Journal

if they have not already done so, clarifying I hope for the last time
that there is no connection between the $10 and the $8. This will

at the same time give us an occasion to explain to the more serious
and concerned among us why the desperate delays in printing are

occurring.

Gerald Anderson —2— Oct. 30, 1973

Now let me conclude by saying that if you have an agenda or any
specific input for this letter which I have just mentioned to our

CM list, by all means feel free to suggest what you would like.
Incidentally, we have received so far as I know no news at all from
our Newsletter editors who were supposed to be putting stuff into the
Journal. Part of the problem was that our editor was not there when
this commitment was made and I do not believe he has caught on to
the fact that they're supposed to be putting something in and thus
138 not been jogging their memories. We might simply ask in the
proposed letter to the CM list that CMS send in news directly to

the editor or to the Newsletter editors.

Enough for now.

Most cordially yours,

Ralph D. Winter

RDW/Cm

