FULLER THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY
School of World Mission

135 North Oakland Avenue, Pasadena, California 91101 / (213) 449-1745 681-9481’
T9; Alan Tippett (cc: SWM faculty) .Dme:July 5, 1974 (July 4 dictation)

gum; C. P. Wagner Subkctbﬁssiology Categories

In response to your memo of June 26, Alan, here is a glossary
of church growth terms which was compiled by Win Arn as a part of his
ministry. As I read it over, I thought that this might be the most
adequate answer I personally could give to your request for input
on the 50 key words for missiological study that will be discussed
in the IAMS. "

P.W.

CPW/d
enc .

 

GLOSSARY

Church Qrouth — an application ct Biblical, theological, so-
c'a‘ and behavioral science principles to the local
church and ite_surrounding community in an effort to
influence and disciple the greatest number of people
?or Jesus Christ. Believing that "it is God's uill
that His Church grow and His lost children are Pound,
Church Growth endeavors to devise strategies, develop
objectives and apply proven principles of grouth to
the local church,"

   

Church Growth ~ Means at Increase -

1. ﬁiolggical — those uho come into the church uho are
chi dren of existing msmberss

2. transfer w the transfer o? membership of those already

”hrietian from one church to another.

3. Conversion - the coming into the church of those uho
are converted by receiving Jesus Christ as Lord and

and Savior.

 

   

 

 

“ Mﬁﬁnﬁ Rf D9¢?93§9 '
1. Death — members of the church called home to be uith

the Lord.

2. Traneter « members of the church who leave end unite

uith another church.

3. Reversion - members of the church uho renounce their

Christian profession by uord/deed and are no longer
involved in the community of faith.

Church Growth — lgges of

1. Internal - grouth of individuals uithin the membership
in their Christian relationship to one another and

to God.
ensign a growth of the church by the evengelization

at nonmChristians within the ministry area a? the

church.
3. Extension a growth of the church by the establishing of

one or more daughter (branch) churches uithin the
same general homogenous group and geographical area.
4. Bridging m grouth of the church by the establishing of
churches in significantly different cultural and

geographical areas.

  

 

 

g;§53§3.Qf.h§§§§§§hi1

Class 1 « members in the church chose energies primarily
turn inuard toward maintenance a? the organizational
structure of the church.

   

 

 

 

Ehsrehwﬁroethnﬁlqsserr ~ page 2

   

Class 2 — members in the church uhose energies primarily
turn outward toward the non~Christian community in an

eFFort to bring them into the body of Christ.
Class 3 w members in the church who are partially paid and

whose activities are divided between the church and

outside activities.
Class 4 m members in the church who are Full time paid

personnel viewed as professional staff.
Class 5 n denominational and/or administrative personnel
'““ﬁ§%lly removed From the immediate scene of the local

church.

Decision — a personal commitment to receive Jesus Christ as

§3\!IDI‘o

Disci le — a person uho has made a commitment to Jesus Christ
as ford and Savior, who is learning and practicing His

teachings and is identified in a meaningful relationship
with His body —— the church, and its mission of spreading

the Gospel.

Evangelism ~ proclaiming Jesus Christ as God and Savior and
persuading men to become His disciples and responsible

members of His church.

Evan elism»-Uorld u evangelism carried on across linguistic,
cultural and geographical boundaries.

iisrssiiem - Qlaesifiqetiene

Evangelism Qne (E1) - evangelization of people in ons's
oun ”anguage and culture. -
Evangelism Iuo (E2) m evangelizetion of people in a simi-

'ar ‘anguage and culture.
Evenjeiismwfhree (E3) — evangelization of people of a
rag ca fy -ifferent language and culture.

Fourth world a those people in America and in the vorld who
have no? heard or believed on Jesus Christ as Savior and

Lord.

 

 
 
    

 

     

   

Eras? Eehmieeien ﬁes} u a cell (church) of committed Christians-
in every community, in every city and in every countryside :
throughout the world uhsre everyone can hear and see demcn—;
strated the Gospel trom his own intimates, in his con
tongue and has a reasonable opportunity to become a dis»

ciple oF Jesus Christ.

 

 

Hpmsrsnessrgrsqg m a group of people in which all the members
~eve some c eracteristic in common and feel that they

"belong."

   
   
 

