EDITOR'S PERSONAL PRESENTATION TO THE BOARD
OF MISSIOLOGY
Held at Wheaton, Illinois, June 7, 1974

[At the request of members of the Board
after I had made this presentation, I
agreed to have it typed out and circulaw
ted. It is reported here exactly as given,
and was followed by a discussion on the
matters mentioned. Alan R. Tippett]

I wrote a personal report to you all in March, before the
meeting at Milligan College. A copy of that report was sent by
post to all Board members not at Milligan. What I have to say now,
presupposes that you have all read this and I do not have to cover
that ground again. It all still applies. '

Those of us who bring out the journal still have not solved
all our problems of personal responsibilities and relationships,
but I suppose we have to work these out for ourselves, and we all
ask your patience with us. Our long delays in the publication process
have frustrated us as much as they must have disappointed you. But
the causes did not all lie with our inexperience and overloaded pro-
grams — the most serious delays were due to mechanical and economic

factors.

I do not mean to imply that I have not made mistakes, and
sometimes I have delayed too long in making decisions. In this I
crave your forebearance, on the score that I am feeling my way and

have no models to guide me. And, maybe, some of my hesitations
have been due to the fact that I am not an American and have often
a culture clash with my associates. when you choose my successor
next time, there are good reasons why he should be an American.

'i'|:l:~a nmrI1inp,, I would Ilka.» to mid n Few points to lihe (_‘.()ﬂl_‘(‘lll,.H
of my March report, to which a couple of Board mumhers replied in a
most helpful manner. This is the first time I have met you face to
face, and I have not had the opportunity of saying what-I am trying
to do with the contents of Misaiology. I want you to know me as an
editorial assembly man. I want you to know what I am looking for
from our contributors, and why sometimes the editor takes so long to
make a decision about whether he can, or should, use an article..

First,and foremost,a number of Missiology is'a total thing.

No article stands by itself. The whole is not the sum of its parts.
They are parts in relationship in equilibrium — maybe in mutuality,
maybe in creative tension. But I want them to reflect the dynamics
of the new era of post—co1onial mission. Somewhere I have to see the
wholeness, the entity which is a new number, before I can really
decide which articles will be bound together.

In that process of interweaving, there are so many things
which have to be taken into consideration and set over against each
other. Furthermore, it is always conditioned by what articles I have
in hand, or what I can persuade contributors to write at a moment's
notice (the most difficult task of all - firstly, because it is hard
to get, and secondly, because when you do get it, it is usually un-
documented and provocative opinion). A provocative subject is always
better when written over a period of time, such as is required by
proper documentation, otherwise it becomes polemic and biased. This
I cannot use unless I have something equally vigorous to set over
against it. It is amazing how so many people, supposedly at the top,
never produce a scholarly article, but write classical orations in
style and imagery. The pity is that some of them have things of
considerable importance to say, and if they wrote with more reason
and courtesy they would win a better hearing. So I have decided not
to be a ﬁrespecter of persons" and have asked several such to work

over their material again.

I have tried to bring things together in an appropriate
combination. I do not say I have succeeded,but this has been my
driving criterion. This not only refers to subject matter, but also
to kinds of writing. Now, with this in mind, let me scan the first
volume. At first, my notions were conditioned by two sets of circum-
stances. (1) I had taken over the material of Practical Anthropology —

so many folders of papers, the contents of which I did not know, and
(2) no one had as yet submitted anything for the first number and I
had to solicit material.

I used four of the_P.A. articles in the first number of
Misaiology and three more in #2. Material was being contributed by

this time. In #3, seven of the eleven articles were from the P.A.
stock, as I'felt I owed something to these contributors, and I also
wanted to maintain something of the P.A. character for the readers
we took over with the incorporation of that journal in Missiozogy.

Ihvl mo vommvnl on A problem hvru. I ullll have nhouf 20
_P.ﬂ. articles unpublished. It has Lnken ull this Lime to get them
road. They all have something to say, but their literary form is
far from satisfactory. I don't know when these will all have been
absorbed.} '

In the first and second numbers of Missiology I wanted to
demonstrate something of the wide scope of missiology as a research
field m we touched missionary relevance, missionary ethics, ethno~
theology, revolution, the missionary as an agent of secularization
and ethnolinguistics in #1. In #2, we touched Black America, Latin
America, American Indians, a survey of Third World Missions and a
deviant movement.

_ In the third number, I raised the tehhnological aspects of‘
the missionary task. Focus here was on the problem of the expatriate.
I utilized a large amount of P.A. material in this number, although
this involved us in an inordinately large amount of editorial re-
search, which should really have been done by the writers themselves.

Number 4 got me into personal research burdens I had not
anticipated. Three articles on China came in within a week or so.
Other circumstances and missionary news of China Study seemed to
call for focus on China. I decided to push through the items I had.
when they were already being typeset, and I considered the wholeness
of my China entity, what seemed to be a large chasm loomed up before
me.‘ I had no anthropology and the symposium would not hold together
without It. Where to find a Christian anthropologist with a China
base? And to do so at a moment's notice. 1 would have gone back and
put together something entirely different, but I had committed myself.
(I learned the folly of saying ‘Yes’ under pressure, that month.)

The material was already typeset and my dead—lines were upon me. In
fear and trembling I wrote the anthropological article myself. There
were so many things that had to be said to round off the entity of
the symposium, and so badly was a heavily documented article needed,
that it got longer and longer. I broke al1‘my own rules for the sake
of the totality of the China focus. It was a conflict of regular
pattern and ideal, and, as I chose the latter, I had trouble with the

former. Maybe I made an editorial blunder — I guess the feed back
will tell. '

I might say that the first number of Vol.II has a focus on
Pnpun New Guinea. Five of the ﬂrliclvn concern that part of the world.
One is an historical survey. The others touch on missionary problems
of stress, pastoral problems due to such things as world view and
polygymy, and a theological item from an islander. Papua New Guinea

stands between home rule (last Dec.) and Full independence (next
Hvc'.), rund tlav liruuns lit n|u1rn|n‘|nl¢w. 'PhIrs wmwrl ..rr Ilar :u!v¢errlrua«
Inents and to the printer a short time ago.

So much for my attempts to pull material together and give

it cohesion. I have a feeling that something is being born. The
contours of a new era of mission are beginning to take shape.
lheology and anthropology are coming together, and the meeting

throws light on history and speaks to the future. I heard an inter-
view on the TWA closed circuit with a fellow—Australian, the singer,
Hvlon Roddy. She has had a classical training, hut spoke of the
changes in the musical world of the last 5 years — a despecialization,
an interweaving of musical types, a creative interaction. 1 think

I see this happening in missiology.

One of the most encouraging things (though it means more and
more editorial work) is the build—up of material I have for future
numbers of the journal. However unpleasant the task of rejecting
material,I have at present on my desk about 80 manuscripts (20 of
them P.A.), and l0 or 12 being set up by the typesetter for #2.

As I glance over this material I perceive the ingredients of
symposia or focal points w one on Africa, one on theological training,
one on language translation and literature, another on research method,
and so on. [I have enough on South America, but it has no wholeness.

[L is dogmatic, billigernnt and biased, and will have to wait for some
counter-current material to bring creative tension before we focus on
it at depth.] I have not worked on this — but I see the clusters
forming of their own accord.

I think, that now we have a stock of "standby" material, our
subject matter problems are in terms, not of scarcity, but of abun-

- dance of material. The rate of submission of articles increases.

During 1973, I received articles at the rate of just over one per week
for the whole year. This year, I have averaged a new article every
four days. This increase now puts the pressure on me to firm up my
rejection policy. In the next three months I shall reread the 80
articles I have, and this will require a lot of letter writing. Bew
fore I do this, I want one direction from you as an Editorial Board,
for I am now getting twice as many articles as I can use, regardless

of the build-up.

In my March letter, I pointed out that we have material for a
Missiological Memoir #1. This, I would recomend. At Milligan, the
President held me off until we get on a firmer financial base. If
that is so, then I shall have to start sending out more rejection
slips for good material. Later on, when we discuss finances, I would

like a definite word on this.

I thankyou for listening patiently to these comments. I hope
they help you to feel something of the editorial atmosphere within which

T am working. Please look at the things for which I am striving,

and he pnLlunt wlth mn nu my unsoulntow and T rry to iron out our

muvhunicul problems. I hope Lo have things working smunLhly and

to be on achedule before the year is finished.

ﬁgggwpress.

: All the editorial Copy Fm“ V0l.IT, #? Irms now gone to the
typesetter, and I hope that before I leave for Lausanne this will

be in the printer's hands.

Material for Vol.II #3 is now being tjped in final form for
typesetting, so I expect to have caught up with the schedule by

Fall.
~* Alan R. Tippett

