Needed: A Revolution in Pastoral Training

The Largest Stumbling Block to
Leadership Development in the Global Church

éy Ralpli D. VI/inter

Ralpb D. Winter is a senior mission
t/Jinker cw/.20 /.2as oeen actively
involved from the oeginning of tlae
massive mission transition from
simply t/sin/aing in terms of countries
or individuals to t/Jinlzing in terms
of peoples. He is founder of t/.2e US.
Center for World Mission, and is
currently president of William Carey
International University.

T/.2is article is updated from a
presentation given as t/.2e opening
address of t/.2e annual conference of t/.2e
Association of C/Jristian Continuing

Education Sc/Jools and Seminaries
known asACCESS, ‘w/.2ic/.2 met on

t/.2e campus of t/.2e US. Center for
World Mission.

International Journal of Frontier Missions

’m a little embarrassed by the wording of this topic. It sounds pompous.
There are, of course, other problems besides the one to whichI refer,

although none, I believe, more serious.

I’m not going to let you wonder until the very end of this talk just what I
think that stumbling block is. I refer very simply to the far-reaching practice
of selecting the wrong people for training. It is that simple, and it is as much

a problem in the West as it is in the rest of the globe.

But, why would we—and I include myself as part of the theological educa-
tion movement—why would we do such a thing as to select the wrong people
for training? Why, all over the world, would we put enormous sums of

money and manpower into training t/.7e -wrong people?

Thus, you can see why my simple statement of the problem cries out for
further comment. Just to state it seems baldly and hopelessly erroneous. How

could it possibly be true?

Note carefully that if in fact you spend your energies training the wrong
people, you also bypass the right people. You in effect suppress the training
of the right people if you are using up your time and facilities and resources

in training the wrong people.

Nevertheless the fact is that all over the world, especially in the United States,
but also wherever the “long hand” of the Western church reaches, precisely the
more gifted leaders of the Christian movement are being sidetracked and not
being recruited into ministry. The growing edge of Biblical faith around the
world has little to do with residential training of pastoral leaders.

Let’s go to Africa. In Africa the majority of those who earnestly follow
Christ, who seek the living God, and for whom the Bible is the most
prominent feature of their movement, are not even what we would normally
call Christians. They are part of a very wide spectrum of movements ear-
lier called the African independent c/Jurc/.2es, and then the African indigenous
c/Jurc/.2es, and now more recentlyI hear it is the African—initiated c/Jurc/.2es. The

World C/Jristian Encyclopedia claims there are more than 50 million Africans

20:3 Fall 2003 -86

in this movement! These movements
do not employ residential schools for
church leadership.

Let's go to Brazil. Seven out of eight
new churches—and there are about
ten or ﬁfteen new ones a week—are
Pentecostal. They don't have seminar-
ies. They don't believe in seminaries.
That isn't quite true: the Assemblies of
God now ﬁnally have a seminary in the
United States—and will inherit all the
problems that is going to create. In any
event, Latin America is a very rapidly
growing sphere of world Christianity,
but some feel it is not growing “prop-
erly," “respectably," “normally.”

It is growing out of control. It isn't
coming to our feet for training. It
isn't coming to our institutions. Its
people don't have time for that. And
our institutions are not interested in
reaching out to such people.

A little digression here. I was asked to
go back to Brazil ten years after ﬁrst
preaching the gospel of Theological
Education by Extension (TEE) at a
Sao Paulo conference of 65 seminary
leaders. I was there as the last Anglo
executive director of the Association
of Latin American Theological
Schools, Northern Region (in Brazil
I was asked to speak out of my ter-
ritory). At the end of this four day
conference they formed (right on the
spot) an association for theological
education by extension. I didn't pro-
pose that they do that; they just did it,
and I was very pleased to see it happen.

Ten years later I was invited to speak
again at their annual meeting. They
said, “Come back to see what we've
done." So I went back and in ten years
they had developed over a hundred
specialized textbooks in Portuguese for
their burgeoning extension movement!

Then, twenty years later (these visits
were in 1965, 1975 and 1985), I was
asked to go down again. This time I
was for the ﬁrst couple of days quite
in the dark as to what was going on.
But I found out at a lunch the second
day that they had changed the name
of their association. They dropped out
the word “extension.” It was now just
an association of theological schools.
After 20 years of what the anthro-

pologists call “cultural levelling" most
of the people at the meeting didn't
really know much about extension.
They wouldn't have ever come to an

ACCESS meeting.

I was aghast, and so I shifted gears.
In the last two days of the conference
I preached the gospel of extension
from scratch. As it says in the book of
Acts, “and some believed.” However,
although the seminaries are moving
away from extension, the church
movement is out of control, and “stan-
dard schools" have little relationship
to the growing edge.

Let's go to India. In South India
there may very well be more people
outside the formal church movement
seriously reading the Bible and fol-
lowing Jesus Christ than the number
of equivalently serious believers who
call themselves Christians (or who are
called Christians by anybody else).
This vast movement of believers does
not employ residential schools to
create leaders.

Or go to China. Here's the largest
movement in human history that has
grown as fast as it has. Out of practi-
cally nothing in thirty-ﬁve years to 50,
60, 80 million people. There are now
also thousands of “regular” churches.

But I'm mainly talking about the
ﬁfty thousand “house churches." It
bears mention that the saving grace
of the Chinese church is the fact that
in most of the house churches the
“theological anchor man" is a woman,
trained as the result of the work of
women missionaries years earlier.

The irony is that the male missionar-
ies were expected to carry the load of
conveying the Biblical inheritance.
They were expected, naturally, to
teach in “proper” schools. They did.
But note, for every man taught by

a man in a “proper" school, women
missionaries taught dozens of women
(who really learned and loved the
Bible) by “extension” methods. What a
providence. That unplanned extension
phenomenon is the principal reason
there is a husky church in China with
the degree of Biblical knowledge it
does in fact possess. Korea is similar.
The vast majority of the 50,000 house

Ralph D. Winter 87

churches under the umbrella of the
Full Gospel Church on Yoido Island
are, for example, essentially pastored
and taught by women ‘w/.20 /Jarue learned
t/.2e Biéle éy nanformal met/Jods.

Granted that not all of these move-
ments have their theology as straight
as we do! But I remember McGavran
used to say, “Look, it doesn't matter
what these people believe. The main
thing is, are they reading the Bible? If
they are serious about the Bible, they'll
turn out okay." That brief comment of
McGavran's shouldn't be taken as his
complete wisdom on these movements.
But in any event, it doesn't really
matter; according to McGavran, what
they believe will balance out if they are
pursuing the living God in the pages
of His Word. And it is up to us to get
that Word into their hands.

In India illiteracy isn't the same prob-
lem. You've got a lot of very highly
literate, highly educated, very wealthy
people in India who can buy anything
that's in the bookstore. In Africa, it is
quite different. Many of the leaders of
this 50-million block aren't literate.

It isn't that these people are hereti-
cal due to rebelling against God. It is
because—here's the key word—access
was not there.

So we've now covered a very large
proportion of the earth's surface.
Let's return to the United States.
Here I quote Wagner to the effect
that most of the last 25,000 new
churches in this country are devoid
of seminary-trained leaders. Maybe
ﬁve percent have seminary-trained
leaders. Wagner is not saying this is a
good thing. He's just describing what

is true.

But, when you come to the United
States there is a different dynamic to
some extent. It is not that the people
don't have the money to go to school,
or that they don't live near enough to
go to school, or that they can't leave
their families or jobs to go to school.
In this country those problems are
much more rarely the case. It is many
cases trivial factors.

Thus, in this country the rapidly
growing edge of the Christian move-
ment employs what could be called

20:3 Fall 2003

88 The Largest Stumbling Block to Leadership Development in the Global Church

“non-professional leaders." The same
thing is true in England, with ﬁve
thousand new churches over there.
There’s practically no connection
between these new churches and the
standard, traditional, orthodox theo-
logical training which we all rightly
value so highly. And the reason is
mostly a practical lack of access.

I remember a man in Costa Rica, the
year I was there studying Spanish,
way back in ’57. This man was a CPA,
very bright, earnest, a lay believer. He
wanted to go to seminary. He lived
right next door to the seminary, one
of the best in Latin America. I said,
“Well, you don’t have any problem.”
He said, “Well, you know, I have to
work during the day, and they only
teach during the day.” So he couldn’t
go to seminary. Now, there was a case
of a potential leader being sidetracked
by what I call a trivial factor.

We are not training the right people,
not just because the right people don’t
want to study, but because usually
we’re not making what we have acces-
siole to the right people.

My own personal pilgrimage, you
might call it, has put me into con-
tact with a lot of evidence for this.
When I ﬁrst got to Guatemala, I

had no idea of what I’m now saying
here. However, a friend of mine from
seminary days had been there before
me for ﬁve years, Jim Emery. He had
already ﬁgured out that the key lead-
ers the church really depended upon
weren’t able to go off to the capital for
years to seminary and then come back
to their families and their jobs.

I have calculated that if you wanted to
ﬁnance all the real local leaders around
the world with “proper” (residential)
theological seminary training, it would
run about $15 billion per year.

You say, “Wow, there must be a huge
number of these people.” That’s

right. There are about two million
functional pastors who can't formally
qualify for ordination, or who are
mostly not ordained simply because
they cannot practically penetrate the
formal mechanism of theological edu-
cation even if it might be theoretically
accessible to them.

International Journal of Frontier Missions

/Jere are aéout two million ﬁtnctional pastors
1050 . . . cannot practically penetrate the formal
mec/Janism of t/Jeological education

Billy Graham in 1983 brought ten
thousand of these local leaders to
Amsterdam. He thought he was
bringing all the itinerant evangelists
of the world. Actually, not one out
of ten was an itinerant evangelist in
the specialized sense. These were all
itinerant evangelists in the ordinary
pastoral sense. In Guatemala, every
single church is in the business of
starting new churches. The average
number of new congregations being
started would be three per congrega-
tion. One church I know down the
mountain from us had the beginnings
of twenty-ﬁve new churches going at
one point.

So, when Billy Graham brought all
these local leaders to Amsterdam, he
no doubt thought the lectures and
inspirational talks he offered them
were going to be a great blessing. And
I am sure they were. But, I thought to
myself, ten thousand of them—that's a
teaspoonful. Then in 1986 he brought
another group to Amsterdam, a larger
number. I was at that second meet-
ing. It was a wonderful meeting. I met
a lot of the two hundred ﬁfty from
Guatemala alone. I knew many of
them myself Again, Billy may have
thought, “Now I’ve done my job. I’ve
gotten all these people some good
Bible teaching.” I could have suggested,
“If you really want all such people to
come, you have to expand your atten-
dance from ten thousand to 2 million.

That’s how many functional pastors
there are, who are literally operating
as pastors but do not have a scrap of
formal, theological education—and
never will—the way things are going.
Access is the problem.

When I was in Guatemala, then, for
ten years, James Emery and I worked
together very closely and developed
what was later referred to as “the
Presbyterian experiment,” which we
called t/Jeological education oy exten-
sion. I edited a book by that title of
some six hundred pages. (The current

phrase for all this is “distance educa-
tion, although distance is not the
key problem. Access is. Remember
the CPA who lived next door to the

seminary in Costa Rica.)

There are also what could be called
“political” problems. We didn’t fore-
see running into political problems
within the church. All these new
local leaders coming into the training
program, who were being recruited
by the new extension program of

the seminary, would show up at

the Presbyterian meetings. While
almost all were ordained elders, many
of these people were also business
people, or lawyers, or attorneys.

One of the older pastors, trained as a
young person in the former seminary,
told me, “The missionaries are trying
to dethrone the pastors.” He ended
up running a bookstore. There were
people in his church who were more
gifted than he was.

He’d gotten into seminary as a young
person needing something to eat and
a place to sleep, no doubt wanting

to learn, and he became a pastor, a
faithful person, but he was better at
running a bookstore than a church.
The man who took his place came
right out of lay work as an adult and
was trained in the seminary by an
extension method. It wasn’t very long
before the number of people that had
theological education made accessible
to them by extension were able to out-
vote all the existing pastors.

If that political fact had not been
true, our experiment would have been
voted out of business, you can be sure
of that—a deadly reaction from the
cultural momentum of our traditional
system of residential schools. That
momentum has erased progress in
this area all over the world.

Thus, there is a great deal of resis-
tance to change along these lines. Not
just resistance from existing pastors
who studied in traditional fashion.

Most of our theological schools
around the world don’t have any
professors who got their theological
degree in an extension mode. Count
them on your ﬁngers; I don't think
you need any ﬁngers at all.

Here is an example. I was visiting
Gordon-Conwell. This was before
the founding of the Ockenga Institute
which reaches off campus. I had for
years been in touch with Harold
Ockenga, and while I wasn't one of
his closest friends, he was one of the
most respected people in my life; and
I many times over thirty years—from
the time I was a teenager even—
would write him a letter and send
him a self-addressed postcard and he
would give me an answer to a tough
question. I really appreciated that. So
we sat in the refectory—the good old
Catholic name for the cafeteria—and
as we sat across the table he said,
“Ralph, tell me what you mean by
extension theological education. What
would it look like if we were to go
that route?"

You can imagine the exhilaration
that ﬂowed through my veins in

that moment. I said, “Well, look,
over the years, Gordon- Conwell

has pumped hundreds of wonderful,
Evangelical pastors into the veins of
the Presbyterian USA denomina-
tion.” I said, “Over a period of time
you are going to have an inﬂuence on
the whole denomination. But notice
how slowly that is going. Suppose
you put out 100 new ministers into a
denomination of 18,000 ordained pas-

tors each year. After ten years you've
replaced only 1,000 of the 18,000.

But,” I said, “look at it from my
experience back in Guatemala. The
real leaders, the gifted people that
God could readily utilize in a pasto-
ral capacity, are right there in those
churches. You go to the 12,000
congregations, you’ll ﬁnd at least an
average of three people in each of
those congregations who, with the
proper theological training, could be
ordained and could do a better job
than the person who is in the pulpit.”
AndI said, “Stop and think: within
four or ﬁve years, you could ﬂood
the denomination with your people.
There would be no way to stop this

inﬂuence. You could enroll, in one
year, 10,000 students to start with."
Well, good old Ockenga, brilliant,
competent, faithful servant that he
was, he could not digest that.

A similar event took place at my
brother’s home here in Pasadena. He
was very close to David Hubbard,
President of Fuller, and to some of the
others in the development dimension
at Fuller. He invited Dave Hubbard
and me and four or ﬁve others down
to the house one evening shortly after
I came to Fuller from Guatemala.
And (now, this is years earlier than
my conversation with Ockenga)
David Hubbard asked the same ques-
tion: “After all this talk about prin-
ciples and theory and distant places,
what would Fuller actually look like
if we were to go that route?” Probably
I wasn't as cautious and careful and
thoughtful and wise as I tried to be
when I talked later to Ockenga. I
said, “Well, Dave, it wouldn't be any
problem to explain this. First of all
you would shut the campus down and
you would establish maybe 28 exten-
sion centers in Southern California
alone, and enroll probably 8,000
people,” and so on.

I couldn’t even get into the second
paragraph. What I said was perfectly
possible. What I was saying was
perfectly uninteresting. Fuller was
intent on being conventional. What
was good for church leadership had
become a question of what was good
for the establishment of a conven-
tional school.

Well, they did ﬁnally make some
moves when Robert Munger came on
the faculty two or three years later.
He also had similar interests. He was
very much a man of the church, and
he was very eager for the seminary to
make a contribution to the church.
He probably more than any other
person, certainly not I, helped Fuller
into an extension mode, but after ten
years in that mode they still would
not give a degree to somebody who
studied in Seattle.

Even after they ﬁnally got into exten-
sion, one of the students in Seattle
(which was one of Fuller's extension
sites) took all the right courses and

Ralph D. Winter 89

without the registrar noting it quali-
ﬁed for an MA in Theology.

I myself went up to Seattle to teach.
Nobody but a £03/Jer Fuller professor
was sent to teach. All the same text-
books, everything; you couldn't pos-
sibly say that it was a deﬁcient process.

But when a person up there, inadver-
tently to the school’s expectations, took
all the courses she needed and then
asked for the appropriate degree, there
was great consternation back home.

I was in the faculty senate at the time,
just eight people: two from each of the
three schools, the registrar, and the
president. The registrar said, “This is
ridiculous. We can’t give degrees to
people who studied someplace else.” I
remember the great New Testament
expositor, George Eldon Ladd (he was
one of the two representatives from
the school of theology), I remember
him pounding the table and saying,
“No one will ever get a degree from
Fuller who doesn’t come and study
here in Pasadena on this campus!” He
would exclude even the people who
would come right to the campus in
the evening program to study, éecause
t/Jey were not z‘/Jeproper kind afpeople.
They were older people, not recogniz-
ably the right age. They were more
intelligent, they were more experi-
enced, stable Christians. I mean, you
can't expect t/Jase people to be min-
isters, can you? You don’t want t/Jem
to get a degree, do you? You've got to
keep them out of ordination. That’s
conventional wisdom.

Now, by the way, 30 years later, you
can get an MDiv degree from Fuller
without ever leaving Seattle. But why
have we been so slow to come to this?
There was no reason they couldn't,
except, well—this is a pervasive
problem in human society—when the
means to an end becomes the end, you
are in big trouble.

Remember, all of us here represent
“means”: schools, schools that are

set up to provide a certain service.
Princeton Seminary’s catalog says,
“We exist to serve the church." I think
that’s an honest statement, but it is

not accurate. Princeton Seminary has
other goals that it has to deal with.
Intermediate goals, sure, éut interme-

20:3 Fall 2003

90 The Largest Stumbling Block to Leadership Development in the Global Church

diate goals are tl.2e worst enemy of tl.2e
real goals you can’t see oeyond t/Jose
intermediate goals. They have the
intermediate goal of paying all those
professors. That means they have the
intermediate goal of getting enough
money in, not only in tuition but in
donations. They have a lot of things to
do to keep alive and to keep going and
to keep their building program in mind
and their Speer library and all that vital
stuff. Tl.2ey’=ue got enougl.) to tbink aoout
wit/.2out tbinking aoout tl.2e cl.2urcl.2.

Now, they probably do think about
the church some of the time, but this
recent book (Being T/Jere), which
highlights one of the mainstream
seminaries, gives you one of the most
dismal views you can imagine. I just
blanch at the thought. I can't imagine
C/.2ristian Century even publishing
their review (of Being T/Jere) of what
actually goes on in such schools for
whom apparently t/.2e means /.2as oecome
t/.)e end. The real end is out of sight.

Years ago, long after I got to
Guatemala, Jim and I had worked on
our TEE program and we sold the
idea to other missions in Guatemala,
then to other countries. Then, an
association of theological schools was
formed in the northern region, which
means seventeen out of twenty-one
Latin American countries were in
this association called ALET. I was
the second executive director of that
association. Our perspectives about
extension were woven right into the
structure of that association (not like

the ATS). That took me all over the
place, to different countries.

In those days there was very little
resistance in the mission ﬁeld to ideas
that would nourish the church. I
think missionaries, most of whom do
not spend their full time in schools,
are very much more alive to the pos-
sibilities of theological extension.
That’s why our ACCESS conference
theme this year, “Global Access,” is so
important. We are talking about the
global reality. Now that may shake

us up just a little, because all these
reviews, all these books are slavishly

conﬁned to the USA.

In any case, as I and others went
around to different countries, visiting

International Journal of Frontier Missions

these different schools, a great deal
boomed into action. Eventually we
were going around the world under
the sponsorship of the Evangelical
Foreign Mission Association
(EFMA—now called the Evangelical
Fellowship of Mission Agencies).
Wagner went around the world with
Ralph Covell. Covell and I went
around the world the next year sowing
the seeds of TEE.

Wayne Weld, later a professor at
North Park Seminary in Chicago, did
his doctoral dissertation at Fuller on
the development of the movement,
and produced a hefty book entitled
Tl.2e World Directory of TEE. At the

time his book was produced 100,000
people were studying for the ministry

VVe must make tl.2at
pattern respectable in tlye
United States.

under what might have been 400 to
500 schools around the world.

But then, while that early TEE move-
ment to some extent is still there, I
have often referred to it as collapsing.

What our ACCESS society will do or

can do about that collapse I’m not sure.

I’m sure of what it could do. T/.2e major
impediment wl.2icl.) wit/.2drew tl.2ose
sclzools from /Jelping people into t/.2e
ministry oy extension was t/Jeﬁzct tl.2at
t/.2is pattern was not oeing followed in
t/.2e United States. Why? To a great
extent what’s done in this country
tyrannizes what can or can't be done
in the mission ﬁeld either near or far.

So what can ACCESS do? Hold its
head up and continue to expand into
schools who reach out to real leaders
and don’t just wait for younger, imma-
ture students to come to them. We
must make that pattern respectable in
the United States.

Now, the other mission ﬁeld I talked
about, these burgeoning churches

in Africa, Latin America, India and
China,—they don’t even know how
you spell “seminary.” They are not
inﬂuenced by what seminaries will or
won’t do in this country. But in any
event, the reason for the decline in
TEE was simply that gradually the
residential schools of the nonwestern
world—about 4,000 now—realized
they weren’t doing what was conven-
tional in the USA, and gave up TEE
in order to be “proper."

Then, of course, the “degree-comple-
tion” movement came into being.
Again, it is not a movement that was
the result of people getting down on
their knees and praying, “Now, Lord,
are we really serving the church?" It
was a movement that was pressured
ﬁnancially. The anticipated decline of
the 12 million 18 to 22 year-old “baby
boomers” in college was predicted to
drop in half. Schools, to survive, had to
go off campus to replace that tuition.

So many schools were scared to death
they were going to go broke that the
accrediting associations didn’t say
anything when they did ﬁnally begin
to teach away from the campus.

NowI understand from Dr. Oosting
that the accrediting associations are
beginning to take a bead and to shoot
at these degree completion programs
to make sure they increase the quality
and time and all that up to the norm,
and so forth. But, it is very, crucial
what the pattern is now well-estab-
lished in this country. In fact, we
ﬁght not against ﬂesh and blood.

We ﬁght against mammoth cultural
forces: the degree-mania of our time,
especially in Asia, the inﬂation of
units, the redeﬁnition of all kinds of
things; but probably t/.2e worst of all

is w/.2at I would call institutionaliza-
tion, w/.2ic/.2 replaces tl.2e end witl.2 t/.2e
means. Whenever an institution of any
kind becomes ﬁrst concerned about its
own existence that is the beginning of
decline right there.

I think, for example, of the welfare
workers in Wisconsin. I was read-
ing an article in the Los Angeles
Times the other day which said that
Wisconsin is making remarkable

progress in getting people into jobs
and getting them off welfare. Their
biggest problem is not the people on
welfare, but the people in the welfare
ofﬁces who are not as interested in
welfare people getting off welfare as
they are keeping enough people on
welfare so as to protect their jobs in
the welfare ofﬁce!

Now, translate that into the seminar-
ies. The biggest problem with the
seminaries is that they don’t want
what is needed most. The welfare
workers can only stay in business if
there are lots of people on welfare.
They don’t want people to go off
welfare. They are the biggest single
problem in the state of Wisconsin.
The seminaries think they can stay in
business only if they have residential
students. And staying in business
comes ﬁrst.

There are other ways that people can
measure progress. The post ofﬁce, for
instance. There is some link between
how much mail comes in and what
the local postal workers are paid. I
know that to be true, because they

are so eager to get the business away
from the other post ofﬁce down the
street! That could only be true if there
is something in that for them. So the
post ofﬁce measures its success in part
by how much the volume is. All kinds
of institutions measure themselves by
different things. But when an institu-
tion comes to the point when its lead-
ers measure themselves by how many
students are there or what their enroll-
ment is, that deﬁnes a problem since
that's only a means to the end. The
real question is, who’s there? Or more
precisely, w/Jo is it t/Jat isn’t t/Jere .9

Now, take John Wimber, a local boy
here in Southern California, I knew
him before he was famous in the
Vineyard movement. He never went
to seminary to study; he went to semi-
nary to teac/.2. And his movement has
200, 300, 500 churches, I don’t know.
Those people don’t go to seminary.
They should. I’m the ﬁrst one to say
that what seminary has to offer would
be very signiﬁcant to his people. But
somehow the access isn’t there. On and
on. We could say the same for many,
many leaders in America today. T/.)e
growing edge of t/.2eAmerican c/Jurc/.2 /.2as

bad to learn to do wit/.2out t/.2e seminar-
ies. Not because the seminaries don’t
have something crucial to offer. Not
even because they don’t know how

to offer it. It is because they have not
decided to offer it to the right people.

I’ll give you a case in point. Not

long ago the seminaries balked and
screamed at the thought of offering a
two-year degree. True or false? It is
true. That was a tremendous, trau-
matic thing for them to offer a two-
year degree, because they didn’t want
it to cut into their three -year degree.

I remember sitting at dinner in the
home of a professor at a certain semi-
nary. I was praising the school for its
downtown MA program in Missiology
in the heart of a major city. I no sooner
got halfway into the sentence than

he said, “Yeah, but you can’t get an
MDiv on the basis of that program.
You have to come back to this campus
and start from scratch if you are going
to get an MDiv." He was protecting

a certain program. I don't think his
main concern was what could happen
to those natural leaders down town.
He was really primarily t/Jinking aoout
t/.2e means rat/.2er t/Jan t/.2e end. And on

and on. You could ﬁnd hundreds of
examples of this.

The University of Wisconsin during
the Second World War was asked

by the Navy to repackage all of their
college courses for extension use, and
the Navy would pay the bill. The
University of Wisconsin is a very high
level, high class, respectable school,
but they didn’t have any trouble doing
that. Just like that, an entire col-

lege curriculum was now available to
anyone in the Navy, anywhere. They
just did it!

But they drove a hard bargain. They
demanded, in effect, “When the war’s
over, every single book you still have in
your hands will be burned, because we
want to go back to our cloistered, hal-
lowed on campus school system. We
don’t want to continue to be a beneﬁt
two and a half million students.”

How do you like that? Simply because
they were paid to do it, they could do
it. There’s nothing mysterious about
extension technique. Technology

and all that kind of stuff is great, but

Ralph D. Winter 91

helping people that are out there, it is
pretty obvious how to do it. You don’t
have to be a brain! It is the question of
whether we want to do it, not whether
we are able to do it. And w/.)at we

do in t/.2is country /.2as oruerw/Jelming
impact upon sc/Jools around t/.2e world.
Right now most of the schools around
the world are going in the wrong
direction—following us!

Question Period

Question: How do you evaluate the
view of some denominations about
the professionalization of the pastor-
ate as a requirement, for instance
with an MDiv? What kind of effect
does that have?

I/Vinter: It is like shooting yourself in
the foot. Really. That’s the histori-
cal fact. Every single denomination
in this country that has evolved a
required formal, extensive graduate
professional training for ordination

is now going downhill. There are no
exceptions in the whole world. In fact
people have gotten the wrong impres-
sion about seminaries, joking about
cemeteries, and so on.

The schools assume that whoever the
students are, a good curriculum and
pastorally experienced faculty will
graduate good pastors. Rather, even a
poor curriculum and pure scholars for
faculty would graduate good pastors 
/Jig/Jly gifted, mature C/.2ristians were
t/.2e students! Seminaries have no policy
of turning such people away; they
simply don’t make sure to give access

to them—which is something which
ought to be their highest priority.

Question: You have identiﬁed the
problem. What’s your prognosis for
the future? Are you optimistic or pes-
simistic?

I/Vinter: In this country it is a little
different from what it would be in
the rest of the world. I’ve already
described the fact that most of the
growing Christianity of the world
does not even know what a seminary
is, so in a certain sense, don't worry
about Christianity. It is going to take
care of itself This is the outrageous
phenomenon! Most people think
that we've got to send more mission-
aries and send more money just to

20:3 Fall 2003

92 The Largest Stumbling Block to Leadership Development in the Global Church

keep Christianity from collapsing. It

is almost the other way around! We
could double our missionary force,

and we could only slow down those
church movements that would buy into
our method of preventing real leaders
from ordination. I'm very optimistic
about the church if we can refrain from
preventing its real leaders from leading.
However, I don’t think there’s much
hope for these 4,000 schools in the so-
called mission lands unless they can see
beyond their intermediate goals.

Question: Do you want to com-

ment on the curricula being designed
around the Great Commission as well
as the Great Commitment?

I/Vinter: Since the average evangelical
seminary is mainly talking about the
Old Testament or the New Testament
or church history at any given time—
remember, that's their three-fold core
emphasis—it is not very hard for that
material to be interpreted in terms

of global mission. This is what we've
done in our 320 lessons that run all
the way through seminary content.
For example, we’ve been overjoyed to
discover, right in the book of Genesis,
36 missiological issues. Normally,

you know, people study Genesis in
one school and missiology in another
school, and when they study Genesis,
they don’t study the missiological
issues of that narrative. When they
study missiology, they don’t study
Genesis. The two things are separated
out. But the missiological issues in the
book of Genesis can well be integrated
into standard curricula. I don’t think

it is very diﬂiculz‘.

But, on the other hand, it is very
unlikely to be integrated in most
schools for the simple reason that those

who handle the Bible don’t normally
think in terms of global mission.

I would just say, also, that in terms

of optimism or pessimism, it is sort

of like the New Testament situation
where the Jews could be pessimistic
about the expansion of their faith

and wouldn’t recognize the Greeks as
being of the same faith. So they were
pessimistic when they could have been
optimistic. Later on, the Catholics
were very pessimistic when they saw
the breakaway of what was later called

International Journal of Frontier Missions

Protestantism. They were pessimistic
when they should have been opti-
mistic. We are in a similar situation
today. We can cross the world, and
we say, “What’s going on?" And some
people are very pessimistic about the
heresies and the abounding diversi-
ties and the confusion of the informal
unbounded global Christian move-
ment when maybe they should be very
optimistic. So it is partly a question of
what you are looking for, from what
perspective. Like Jesus said about
John the Baptist’s question—What
did you go out to see?

Question: Would you like to comment
on the point that overseas the theo-
logical vacuum is being ﬁlled particu-
larly by the Bible college movement
and extensions of that movement?

I/Vinter: I wish it were true. It is true
that there are 4,000 schools. We

have a book produced by the World
Evangelical Fellowship’s Theological
Commission, listing 4,000 schools, at
least 3,000 of these being in the non-
Western world. And these schools
have students, many young people.
But, and here is the crucial point,
many of them are more concerned to
keep their enrollment up than they
are to ﬁnd and educate—by what-
ever means necessary—the actual,
real, mature, gifted leaders in their
associated church movements. It is
not a question of whether we think of
humble Bible schools or well-endowed
seminaries, the key question is whether
or not they are offering access to the
real leaders of their movement.

However, even if they had nothing but
proven, gifted leaders in their schools
(which is highly unlikely if they are
running daytime classes), even so their
entire number of students is still only
a drop in the bucket compared to the
massive number of functional pas-

tors running the churches, who can't
make it to school because they are busy
planting new churches, holding down
bi-vocational jobs and families as well.
For example, all the overseas schools
together enroll less than 100,000. But
there are 2,000,000 functional pastors
with no formal theological education.

Thus, I’m saying that the theological
education one receives is not just valid

if it is like what we do in this country.
What we do in this country just won’t
ﬁt in most situations overseas. Note
that I have no problem at all with the
so-called “scurrilous” Bible schools.

In fact, I feel a little bit funny that
this association, after 20 years, has
sort of accidentally demoted a lot of
schools because they didn’t ﬁt a par-
ticular monocultural pattern. We say
you can't be an institutional member
of this association unless you do
certain things a certain way, which for
the most part has very little relevance
to the real world, much less the
non-Western world. In that momen-
tary—and I would think erroneous—
conclusion our association did, I feel,
wound itself in terms of recognizing
the validity of Bible training of many
other sorts.

But even if you take all of that into
account, the ordaining force in most
mission-related churches (which is

a very substantial part of what we
would call recognizable Christianity
around the world), the ordaining
requirements are such as to rule out
people for ordination if they merely
have the so-called “scurrilous” train-
ing. There’s always going to be one
person who went off overseas to
Columbia Bible College, say, came
back with a “proper” degree, and from
then on, all other education is no
longer considered worthy, is demoted
to secondary status.

Probably the most remarkable use of
Bible schools that I know of would be
in Latin America by the Assemblies
of God in their so-called “night Bible
schools." These night Bible schools,
ﬁrst of all, were, note, in the evening.
That means they were uccessiéle. As far
as I’m concerned, a night school is an
extension operation. Distance, frankly,
has nothing to do with it. Remember
the CPA who lived next door to the
seminary? “Distance” education would
have solved his problem, but the dis-
tance in his case was not geographical.

In any case, those night Bible schools
fueled the church with an amazing
amount of biblical knowledge and
stature in the Word that enabled the
people who had gone through those
Bible schools to be elevated into the

ministry over a long period of very
careful selection. Thus, in the so-called
Pentecostal movement very rarely is

a man ordained who is the wrong
man. In our movement once “formal”
schooling, whatever you call it, gets a
hammerlock on who gets ordained in
the church, then the church may say,
“Okay, we won’t ordain anybody unless
he or she goes to our formal school—
we like higher standards."

Once they make that fatal step,
they’ve ruled out most of the gifted
people who could be leaders in

the church. And that’s what the
Assemblies of God in Latin America
did not do. And their movement is
now so strong you practically have to
be a Pentecostal if you are going to go
to Latin America. Talk about pessi-
mism and optimism, the mainstream
churches that we think of as respect-
able churches in this country are not
only half dead in Latin America, they
are almost completely invisible—they
are overwhelmingly outnumbered!
They’re zany rare objects by compari-
son to the new mainstream of Latin
America. The same would be true in
slightly different form in most other
parts of the world.

Further Comment on the Actual
Track Record of Evangelical

Educational Structures
ACCESS is a society of schools which
have sought to educate at a “distance.”
Our experience over the last 26 years
has proven for any perceptive person
that real education does not have to
take place through classroom incar-
ceration. We in ACCESS hold the
key to an educating lifestyle that
allows people both to learn and at the
same time attend to the meaning-

ful duties and challenges of real life
instead of succumbing to the by-now
culturally approved years-upon-years
spent in an artiﬁcial school world that
is numbing and perverting.

When, without blinking, we measure
education by the number of years in
school, when we say someone is more
highly educated than someone else just
because he has lost more years in the
school world, we are very nearly totally
confusing t/.2e means with z‘/.2e end.

But all this is merely basic to the
speciﬁc application of our topic.
Several examples may illuminate
this background in order for the
foreground of the needs of church to
be seen more clearly.

Let’s look ﬁrst at Moody Bible
Institute. It started out as a continu-
ing education school in the evening
for the thousands of adults who had
been caught up in an immense revival
of faith that swept this country and
England in which Moody was a prin-
cipal force. This vast revival produced
the school, not the reverse. For various
reasons, however, the Moody Bible
Institute soon transitioned into school-
ing young people during the day. It
did not give up its continuing educa-
tion component because its extension
activities are substantial. It is just that
the day-school activities are what
people now think of when they think
of Moody Bible Institute. I think that
the transition was not unreasonable at
the time. The older students at night
wanted their children to be exposed to
vital Bible teaching. And the teachers
could not make a living just teach-
ing in the evening. Furthermore, as

a faculty was gathered subjects arose
for discussion that may have been
tangential. For example, for some
years Moody’s faculty was known for
its mastery of a detailed countdown
of eschatology. It is not that Moody
has not performed a great service to
the church. The fact that 157 Bible
Institutes jumped into existence
conﬁrms the existence of the market
which they served. But in many
respects this vast Bible institute phe-
nomenon became one huge mistake.

Let’s behold something similar: the
costly transition of A. B. Simpson’s
even earlier school in New York City
to today's Nyack College up the
Hudson River. That occurred during
a nearly full century in which the 157
similar Bible Institutes came into exis-
tence and then one by one marched out
of existence—as Bible Institutes.

In addition to the shift awa from
u u y -
tra1n1ng adult leaders, I am convinced
that a major mistake made by this
entire Spiritually vital tradition took
lace when the turned attention to
P Y
young people—for whom the secular

Ralph D. Winter 93

world has a prescribed pattern for
growing up. This second mistake

was the assumption that the cultural
norms of the secular culture could be
ignored. Instead of adding Bible to
what people had already learned or
were learning in the public schools
(as was and is the case of the evening
adult students) the Bible Institute
movement soon became a generally
irretrievable replacement for a number
of signiﬁcant years—three or four—of
secular school experience.

It ought not to be a surprise, now 100
years later, that this grand experiment
died, an experiment that once ﬂow-
ered and was ﬁrst replaced by Bible
Colleges, and then more and more

by what are called Christian colleges,
which do now ﬁnally adhere to the
secular norms.

But think of all that happened and did
not happen during the hundred years
of transition: the tens of thousands,
yea hundreds of thousands, perhaps
millions, of Evangelical youth who
were given diplomas that would not
admit them to further education or to
the professions, Congress, whatever!
The Evangelical Movement has only
recently begun to integrate Christian
knowledge with secular standards and
become a substantial force in the secu-
lar sphere of our society.

A similar thing continues to happen
in the realm of the seminaries. They,
too, continue to pump out degrees
that in the secular world are unintel-
ligible or irrelevant or both. Pity the
seminary graduate who would like to
think that his three or four years of
seminary will be as respected in the
secular world as is a PhD from, say,
Seattle Paciﬁc University, which is
one of only a handful of Evangelical
schools yet offering a PhD.

But this adds an important note.
Seattle Paciﬁc, and the Holiness
tradition in general—add in the
Christian Church- Churches of
Christ tradition, and yes, the Roman
Catholic tradition—they did not go
headlong into the offbeat pattern, the
Bible Institute pattern. Seattle Paciﬁc,
Abilene, Pepperdine offered PhD
degrees long before the Calvinistic
Bible Institute pattern yielded to that.
Moody, for example, was one of the

20:3 Fall 2003

94 The Largest Stumbling Block to Leadership Development in the Global Church

ﬁrst institutes to exist but one of the

last to offer a regionally accredited BA SPECIAL OFFER TO READERS OF THE

degree How 10113 will it be for Moody INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF FRONTIER MISSIONS
to offer a PhD? The irony is that

Wheaton College avoided the institute Subscribe for one year to the IBMR for ONLY US$15.97
detour partly because of its early ho1i- and you will also receive a FREE CD-ROM!

ness inﬂuence, but has only recently

decided to offer a PhD. Get ! Research Advantage for World Mission

Marvelously, and also recently,
some major Evangelical seminaries

Subscribe to the quarterly
themselves have begun to move
toward the university pattern and offer

INTERNATIONAL BULLETIN OF
2£ii‘i3;§li‘E2,°;‘{*';‘;$°ii.:’£‘.§‘.f;‘£.f.‘i.n. MISSIONARY RESEARCH

MDiv detour.

“Essential for documentation and interpretation of

Now, all of this is an historical per- lntcl-national mission ,,

spective on the shifting pressures of Bulletin '_Dr Ral h Winter

society and of the needs of society in IIRIR--mmRial-ts;---xi<1I-ri»ti:-x-x1i>~iy:- R  Csgtsr for World Mission

regard to the structure and program of ‘IR I I I I I R ,R

the 5Ch°°15- We do Well not to under‘ R‘;   5 If there is one journal in the ﬁeld of mission studies,
estimate the power of cultural tradi-   in any language, that can properly be called indispen-
tions. If it took the entire Calvinistic 4, I  I sable, it is the International Bulletin of Missionary
Evangelical tradition a hundred years  ‘ ‘ R‘ R‘  e R Research. . . . I cannot afford to be without it.

to make up its mind about the wrap-  3 7   "*‘*-" —Pf0feSS0f Andrew F. Walls
ping paper of its educational product, H I  I I  ‘V I" UniVeFSitY “Edinburgh
what will it take to analyze afresh the
essential problems which it came into
existence to address?

of Missionary Research

The IBMR is a splendid periodical of tremendous
value to the academy as well as the church.

—Dr. Mark A. Noll
The reason ACCESS is so poten- Wheaton College

tially cogent is that although day-
time schooling may be appropriate The Best Of

asachild-care mechanism for small '  
/' .-7nmzm.,; \\
~’/ l Bj\[l R \
/"i C”\ ‘I

children, or perhaps even for slightly

older children, however the same kind
of incarceration for young people and
adults in day-time schooling massively
replaces the possibility of signiﬁcant
participation in the real world. Years
ago I deﬁned extension education for

On a CD-ROM—yours FREE when you enter a
@ subscription. This collection features ﬁﬁy
outstanding IBMR articles that have appeared
over the past two decades.

ACCESS ideal has been achieved—as I '°°°iV°d‘) EXP» Date m V153

a procedural goal, at least. "HI I THIS OFFER Mastsrcard
IS FOR NE W

l SUBSCRIBERS Signature
L _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _I

Make check payable to and mail to: INTERNATIONAL BULLETIN OF MISSIONARY RESEARCH,
Subscription Dept., P.O. Box 3000, Denville, NJ 07834 USA
For a new subscription using a credit card, you may subcribe online by visiting
www.OMSC.org or by calling (203) 624-6672, Ext. 309.

myself very simply as “that form of I‘ — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — ‘I
education which does not disrupt the I IBMR SPECIAL SAVHVGS OFFER I
student's productive relation to society.” I Name I
Whether by night classes, weekend I 0 Send me I
. . one year, Address

classes, vacation classes, part-time I 4 Issues for R I
classes, internet activities, or whatever, I only $15.97. Clty I
if it is possible for a student to get on And Send me E-mail

with life, tlolgradually support his exis- I I7Z,';/:e(f:1gD_ I
tence by giving back to society some- I ROM(maj1gd , I

. . . Charge credit card #
thing for his own support, then the I when payment Is I

International Journal of Frontier Missions

