W1038.5

“The Works of the Devil?”

ph D. Winter, General Director, Frontier Mission Fellowship
Presbyterians for Renewal (breakfast at General Assembly), Wednesday 23, 1999

Introduction

Roberta and I appreciate this invitation and
we consider it an honor to be listed with the
others previously recognized.

It would appear that we should in these few
moments give some explanation or defense for
our decision to turn the gift we are receiving to
become seed money for a new enterprise called
the Institute for the Study of the Origins of Dis-
ease. An equal amount is coming by request of
Christy Wilson }r—who was honored last year.
He and I have been close friends for many
years. A few hours before Christy recently died
a friend of his offered $5,000 as a memorial gift,
and asked Christy how he might dedicate it.
Christy suggested the very thing he and I had
talked about in his son's presence the week
before, namely, what we envisioned as the

Institute for the Study of the Origins of Disease.

Thus, for Roberta and me to designate an addi-
tional $5,000 makes ours the second gift to this
new Institute.

In the moments I have here I feel that you
might reasonably expect some sort of explana-
tion for what we regard as momentous reasons
for this new project. In missiological terminol-
ogy it involves no less than a major correction
in the mainstream of Christian theology. (Are
Presbyterians for Renewal supposed to cut that
deep?)

I could wish that Nelson Bell were here. I
believe he would heartily concur with what I
will be saying. The same is true, for different
reasons, with ]ohn Mackay (a former professor
of mine). For though Mackay was one of the
five presidents of the World Council of
Churches, and very concerned for unity, he
was also the one who upheld the equal ecu-
menical legitimacy of the divergent confessions.
Most specifically he upheld the Evangelical
stream within world Christianity. But he did
not regard any particular stream as complete,
and so left unspoken the question of the com-
pleteness or full adequacy of any one of them.
Both Bell and Mackay lived to promote glo-
bally the glory of God. Note, incidentally, that I

will not be speaking of a major correction in
one of these streams of Christianity but rather
an urgent Biblical insight lacking in all of them.

One reason for a correction is that our theo-
logical structure of interpretation of the mean-
ing of the Biblical witness took place centuries
before we had any inkling of the dark intelli-
gence invested in the micro world of disease
germs, and our current theological sensitivities
have, amazingly, not yet adjusted to this new
information. We not only do not commonly accuse
Satan for destructive germs, we have no mission
theology for destroying such germs.

What I am about to present, then, has poig-
nant significance to a man of medicine like Bell,
but also to a man like Mackay, who was pro-
foundly aware of both the values and limita-
tions of all particular streams of Christian
belief. What I will say is significant to both men
in the sense that they too sought to glorify God
to the ends of the earth. I can hope we here
today can fathom that significance.

A Staggering Thought

In the past almost three years of the gradual
progress of bone marrow cancer in my wife's
physical being, we have both been pressed to
ask out loud some unusual questions, and have
begun to develop some unusual answers.

First of all, an idea we did not think of. It is
an arresting and even staggering idea that
looks upon the need for theological renewal as
long ago as the fourth century AD. That was
the first public and political century of Chris-
tianity. It was the kind of mix in which syncre—
tism is often spawned. According to this theory
it was the time when a virulent form of pagan
syncretism lodged itself deeply into our West-
ern Christian theological tradition. A detailed
exposition of this amazing proposal can be
found in a fairly recent Princeton Seminary
Ph.D. dissertation done by Gregory Boyd who
is a currently a professor of theology at the
Bethel Seminary in St. Paul. While we do not
need to agree with all Boyd's ideas, what he
has done in his dissertation is clearly an exten-

sive and intellectual achievement, now a stout
book published by Intervarsity Press entitled
God at War. Some of the flavor of the entire
book can be caught in these few words:

We see...[someone with] polio...and piously
shake our heads. . .saying ”It is the will of
God. . .hard to understand. . .we have to wait to
get to heaven [to understand it]”. . . [By contrast]
Jesus looked at [sickness] and in crystal clear
terms called it the work of the devil, and not the
will of God—[something to be fought not some-

thing to which we should simply resign our-
selves.] (Boyd 19972183)

This contrast, Boyd contends, reveals a
pagan neo—platonist strand in our theology
coming through Augustine no less, and later
through Boethius and his winsome and incredi-
bly influential Consolations of Philosophy. An
exclusive focus on a ”mysterious good” which
God may indeed faithfully and lovingly bring
out of evil thus becomes an expectation of good
”following” evil and distracts us and prevents
us from turning decisively against and crush-
ing the source of that evil. While pagan, it
sounds to our ears like an attitude of noble res-
ignation in the midst of suffering. It works
itself out as a curious passivity in the presence
of evil. It takes ”all things work together for
good” as though God—who does in fact work
good out of evil—as the author of evil.

Thus, for example, we cannot be totally sur-
prised that a godly medieval woman guided by
this kind of theology believed that a worm
under the skin in her forehead must have been
sent by God for her edification, and accord-
ingly, when stooping over one day the worm
fell out, she dutifully replaced it.

Or, in accord with with our by—now—
instinctive Augustinian neo—platonism we
cannot be totally surprised that when a godly
young preacher in Puritan Massachusetts
sought to fight smallpox the other pastors with
one voice opposed him. In the perspective of
their Presbyterian theology he was, and I
quote, ”interfering with Divine Providence.”
No wonder that when that young man died in
the process of trying out a smallpox vaccine on
himself, it was assumed that God killed him.
Strangely, that comparatively young man
attempting to spare the suffering of the Indians
at his mission outpost is known today for his

philosophy not for fighting evil in the form of a
virus—I speak of the saintly ]onathan Edwards.

But, in actual fact, Edwards’ keen thinking chal-
lenged a seriously syncretistic element in our theo-
logical tradition. By Edward's day the syncre—
tized Christian tradition was so durable and so
impervious to change that not for two hundred
years did any individual or group decide to
eliminate smallpox. And when it finally hap-
pened it was not to the credit, this time, of a
preacher, a missionary, or a Christian theolo-
gian. That eradication took place only 21 years
ago!

Edwards’ insight could and should have dis-
placed that particular pagan element in our the-
ology—the passive acceptance of disease as
being God's direct will which we are therefore
not to fight against. Edwards’ insight could
have replaced the pagan element with a theol-
ogy informing and guiding a serious attack on
what the Bible calls, simply, ”the works of the
devil.”

But, that insight died with Edwards. I have con-
cluded with profound sadness, that had that
insight not died with him, our form of faith
might have regained a Biblical zeal to set out
deliberately to vanquish the works of the devil.
In other words had that insight not died with
him my wife today undoubtedly would not
have a terminal form of cancer. And the rest of
you would not have to be daily gambling that
you won’t be next.

Are We Really Passive before Evil?

You may quite readily wonder if I am una-
ware of enormous research that is going on.
Three years ago—when Roberta was first diag-
nosed—I had the idea that surely a lot of
money in this country and around the world
was flowing into foundational cancer research.
Having by now had reason to look into this
supposition I am astounded that actually very
little goes into foundational cancer research
compared to what we spend on cancer treat-
ment (once we wait until this deadly malady
attaches itself to us). To understand and eradi-
cate cancer we spend less than one thousandth
of what we pay for cancer treatments. Indeed,
it may even be less than that. The truth is actu-
ally scandalous—a Satanic achievement?

However, the main point here is not how

little goes to understand disease compared to
the perfectly enormous amount we spend fran-
tically for treatments once we are individually
attacked. That huge imbalance is itself curious
and puzzling. But the more significant point is
that there is absolutely no evidence I know of
in all the globe of any theologically driven inter-
est in combatting disease at its origins. Not
only have I not found any work of theology,
any chapter, any paragraph, but I know of no
sermon urging us—those of us in the pew or in
professional missions—to go to battle against
the many eradicable diseases. ]immy Carter,
our former president, is the only Christian
leader I know of who has set out, in his phrase,
”to wipe Guinea worm from the face of the
earth.” Note that his insight did not come from
a seminary experience but, perhaps, from being
a Sunday school teacher.

Granted that Christian missions spend liter-
ally millions of dollars around the world taking
care of sick people. And we nourish hundreds
of thousands of children in one program or
another, raising them up so they can die of
malaria. (Every sixty seconds four children die
of malaria.) Yet in all the earth I know of only
one very small clinic in Zimbabwe where two
ill—equipped missionary doctors are working
toward the actual elimination of the astonish-
ingly intelligent malarial plasmodium. And in
secular circles the outwitting of that evil bug is
not being pursued by the World Health Organi-
zation, nor the US National Institutes of Health,
nor the Atlanta Center for Disease Control.
Only the U.S.Navy, amazingly, is seriously
involved.

Note that I am not talking about efforts to
avoid disease but efforts to eradicate the very
source of a disease. Thus, I am not talking
about contributory environmental factors or
nutritional factors. All such good things are
defensive measures. We recall that people tried
their best for centuries to avoid smallpox. But it
was better finally to exterminate the virus that
was the source cause.

Defensive measures are good, but notice our
strange theological (and pagan) reluctance to
set out to destroy the disease germs them-
selves. That would be to go on the oﬁfense. Yet
isn't it Biblical—to destroy the works of the devil?

3

In I ]ohn 3:8 we read very simply ”The Son of
God came into the world that He might destroy
the works of the devil.” We don't hear much of
that verse, partly because we yield in our every
day consciousness to secular denial of Satan's
existence.

Is There an Active Satan? When Did He
Get Started and What Is He Doing?

But an additional reason we don't hear
much of that verse is partly because our theo-
logical tradition does not list for us exactly
what the works of the devil really are. The
respected Dutch theologian Berkouer made the
rare comment that ”You cannot have a proper
theology without a sound demonology.”
Another theologian dared to suggest that
Satan's greatest achievement is ”to cover his
tracks.” Note that if in fact Satan has skillfully
”covered his tracks” all of us may therefore be
extensively unaware of his deeds. Paul sug-
gested that we are not to be ignorant of his
devices. We are told that Satan and his angels
once worked for God. If so, I ask, When Satan
turned against God what precise kind of
destruction and perversion did he set out to
achieve? Where would we see evidence of his

works? Would we get so accustomed to evil
that we would be slow to connect Satan with
evil and suffering? Would Satan successfully
tempt us to think that God is somehow behind
all evil—and we must therefore not attempt to
eradicate things like smallpox lest we ”interfere
with Divine Providence”?

In the last 20 years paleontologists have dug
up more evidences of earlier life forms than in
all previous history. One of their thought-
provoking discoveries is that the pre—Cambrian
forms of life included no predators. Then, at a
very distinct juncture destructive forms of life
suddenly appeared at all levels, from large
creatures to the microbiological level.

Is this what Satan set out to do from the time
he fell out with the Creator—that is, he set
about to pervert and distort all forms of life so
as to produce the vast jungle of tooth and claw
that reigns today? Recent lab results indicate
that retroviruses are smart enough to carry
with them short pieces of pre—coded DNA
which they insert into the chromosome of a cell
so as to distort the very nature of an organism.

Can a lion that will lie down with a lamb
become vicious by such DNA tinkering? We do
know that many diseases reflect defective
genes. Very recent literature indicates that, in
the case of the major chronic diseases, infections
are now seriously thought to underlie every-
thing from heart disease to cancer, multiple
sclerosis, Alzheimer's and even schizophrenia.

A Double Enigma

But we confront a second and separate mys-
tery here—beyond the scientific facts. Speaking
in colloquial terms we face a ”double
whammy.” We are not only suddenly aware
that our medical people have been looking in
the wrong direction. We are aware that some
force is delaying that awareness. For example, it
has been two decades since it was clearly
proven that 95% of duodenal ulcers are caused
by a bacterial infection, yet today half the doc-
tors in the state of Colorado still do not employ
the simple remedy now available. Is this not a
clear case of demonic cultural delusion added
to demonic physical distortion? Will we see a
similarly ominous and tragic lag in the applica-
tion of knowledge with regard to the relation
between infectious agents and the major killer
diseases Ijust mentioned? Can and should the
church speak out on these twin problem areas?
I/Vhere are our theologians when we need them?

The Proposed Institute

The proposed Institute for the Study of the
Origins of Disease will have to confine itself in
its early days of severely limited funding to the
collection and dissemination of information
about what is and is not being done. It will
endeavor to attract serious attention to this
sphere. It will use both secular and theological
weaponry, especially the latter. It will try to
upgrade our desire to bring glory to God by
ending our apparently neoplatonist truce with
Satan in the realm of all his ingenious and
destructive works. Our global mission agencies
which already have to their credit the discovery
of the source of leprosy, will declare war on all
sources of disease instead of merely being kind
to sick people and preaching resignation.

Our actions (which speak louder than
words) will no longer proclaim loudly and
embarrassingly that our God can get you a hos-
pital bed to lie on and a ticket to heaven but

4

that He is either ignorant, uncaring, or unable
to do anything about the origins of your dis-
ease. We cannot blame Augustine or Calvin or
Luther for not knowing anything about germs
or the enormous complexities of microbiology.
Can we repentantly accept blame for the con-
tinuing fact that three fourths of all Presbyteri-
ans die prematurely from major chronic dis-
eases which are now suddenly more defeatable
than ever?

Mobilized Christian response may not come
soon enough to materially help my wife—or
yours or you. But it will be in part to the credit
of the Bell—Mackay prize that at least something
will be set in motion to rectify our understand-
ing of a God who is not the author of the
destructive violence in nature and who has
long sought our help in bringing His kingdom
and His will on earth.

Demonic delusions:

1. When we get sick all we need to do is to
pray and inquire of God what his reason is for
allowing this kind of thing.

2. In case we did something unwise that
caused or invited the sickness we don't need to
feel responsible to roll up our sleeves and fight
the source of the disease. God can always use
disease to teach us.

What is it that allows us to simplify the
growing issue of homosexuality—that is, the
question of whether it is an organic or cultural
distortion—without taking account this recent
research that declares it to be a physical distor-
tion resulting from an infectious agent? Per-
haps even curable by laboratory insights? We
are left to two undesirable alternatives: to think
that homosexuality must be perfectly normal or
to think that homosexuality is entirely cultural,
not stopping to think that it may be the result
of a disease. We often read of the widespread
so—called ”feminization” of wild life, grievously
distorting everything from frogs to alligators,
but apparently few people think this can
happen to humans.

