Frontier Mission Fellowship
1469 Bresee Avenue
Pasadena, CA 91104-2604

Ralph D. Winter, General Director

Work: 626-296-7501, Fax 626-398-2185

Home Phone/: 626-794-5544, Cell 626-354-9391
Email: rdw112233@ao|.oom

 

Sunday, Iuly 4, 2004

David Hesselgrave
4345 Terrace View Ln In reply refer to 4704.756

Rockford IL 61114-4707

Dear David,
I append my brief letter to Art Glasser about Cornelius.

Having read your Chapter Two and done some more thinking I can make
the following comment.

A small point: I note that in your text you ﬁrst quote,”a message through
which you and all your household will be saved.” But later you paraphrase,
”in order to be saved.” This bends things in the conventional direction all right.

Much more important is the constantly repeated statement in 10:14 as the
essence of the angel's message to Peter, in 10:28 as the essence of his visit to
Cornelius, and in 11:8 as the essence of his recapitulation, ”Do not call
anything impure that God has made clean.” The issue is whether or not
Cornelius, as is, is acceptable to God. And all this is in the past tense, ”God
has made clean.”

Especially note that this is the sentence Peter quotes immediately upon
meeting Cornelius BEFORE Peter says anything at all about ]esus Christ.

On the other hand there is no suggestion here that the blood of Christ or
the Name of ]esus was not the basis of Cornelius’s salvation. That is the only
way anyone has ever been saved, but this is not to say that ”a knowledge of
Iesus” in the purely intellectual narration Peter gave is the crucial element.
No one before or after Christ was ever saved by His blood without something
more than Gnostic knowledge. The only route known to the Iews (and to us)
is as in 11:18, ”repentance unto life.”

In Peter's stunned, reﬂective summary in 10:34, 35, he is saying that
Gentiles everywhere in the ”God Fearer” category are, as is, acceptable to
God as Iews, they are not to be considered unholy. He does not add, ”if they
can just get the facts about Iesus.”

In other words, the overwhelming Biblical evidence negates our
contemporary additional stricture about the utter necessity of additional head
knowlege beyond OT special revelation. And, it shows that the issue of
General vs Special revelation is an issue that is very different from that of
Cornelius and the NT ”God fearers” in general, all of whom had had
extensive contact with Special Revelation. The glorious Fact enabling this
startling truth, of course, is the blood of Christ not an animal sacriﬁcial
system, which is the ”good” news to the Gentiles,upsetting to Iews.

The U.S. Center for World Miission and the William Carey International University are projects of the Frontier Mission Fellowship

Ralph D. Winter

David Hesselgrave, Sunday, Iuly 4, 2004 Frontier Mission Fellowship -

Thus, the whole dichotomy between circumcized and uncircumcized Page 2

is irrelevant, and the Gentiles who did not follow the law abjectly were
as acceptable to God as ]ews, both equally able to ﬁnd ”repentance unto

life (11:18).”

Now, I have to say that the question of General versus Special
Revelation is an associated topic, and whether Paul was talking about
General or Special revelation in Romans two is a key question.

My intuition in this case is that we do not apparently possess the
necessary knowledge about God’s ways to come down with a dogmatic
assertion. Obviously, all people and their fellowship with God, their
growth in grace, are eminently better off the more they know of ]esus
Christ. We do not need to argue that point.

As you know I believe that we can speed up evangelization and
empower our message greatly by including as much knowlege of God’s
glory as possible. This means ﬁrst of all to see the glory of God in the
face of ]esus Christ. It also means ripping back the cloak we have put
artiﬁcially over all of the glory of God to be seen in the microbiological
world, etc. Irwin Moon style.

To do this is urgent, imperative, and of higher priority than 98% of
what the average believer and the church is actually doing.

Okay, these are some thoughts.

Cordially in Christ,

Ralph

The U.S. Center for World Miission and the William Carey International University are projects of the Frontier Mission Fellowship

