Does Mission Include Heaven and Earth?

Gordon—Conwell Theological Seminary Student Forum
Monday, February 6, 2006
Ralph D. Winter

A very liberal Congregational
church in Los Angeles, the First Con-
gregational Church, used to have out
in front, displayed where it is usual to
see the next Sunday's sermon topic, a
piece of advice seemingly offered to

the whole world. The statement was,
”One World At a Time.”

This perspective, of course, was a
holdover from the era of a liberalism
characterized in part by an emphasis
on social action, as well as doubts
about the Bible and much of tradi-
tional theology.

As you know, the conservatives,
often called Fundamentalists not only
opposed the low view of the Bible but

along with that they opposed the
seemingly earth—bound emphasis on
social action as well.

My theory is, this liberal /
conservative polarization took place in
the era of the 1900s, the 1910s, and the
1920s, as the result of a huge new mass
of common people being brought into
the church predominantly through the
immense impact of Dwight L. Moody —
who himself came from the back
woods of Massachusetts. The diver-
gence was thus not only due to the low
views of the Bible of the liberals but to
the pre—existing social distance
between two classes of people.

Of course, this is a generalization.
The conservative category were not all
poor, uneducated, or ”uncolleged.”

However, it is substantially true that
one group believed in college and sem-
inary education and the other group,

suspicious of the first, founded Bible
Institutes, Moody Bible Institute being
one of the earliest. The latter, pretty
much reinventing Biblical studies,
soon became devotees of eschatology
rather than social solutions involving
human government and politics,
domains far removed from their
normal involvement. Thus, not just
Bible conferences were common
among them but especially Prophecy
conferences. The next world was cen-
tral to their hope, this world being con-
sidered hopeless and getting worse.

This, of course, was the very oppo-
site of many in the liberal tradition,
who, if they believed in the return of
Christ at all, believed that social action
could solve all problems such that
instead of getting worse and worse the
world would get better and better.

The early Bible institutes of these
later Moody—won Evangelicals were
evening schools established to educate
adults who had not grown up in Chris-
tian homes. Such adults already had a
few years of schooling and the addi-
tional study of the Bible in evening
classes was an excellent supplement.

However, when these same adults
persuaded the Moody Bible Institute to
open its doors during the day for the
younger generation this significant
transition exposed the young people to
the Bible but unwittingly removed
them from further conventional
schooling. This, then, established a
new pattern of alternative education
which essentially displaced college
education for two or more generations.

This massive detour into an alterna-

T11eGm(x«iRax«i$.'«1x:e,@2

tive world accounts for the relative
absence of Evangelicals in the profes-
sions throughout a 60 to 90-year
period. It explains the absence also of
very much thinking about social solu-
tions of the kind involving or requiring
civil government, something in which
they had little part anyway. This is
parallel to the Spirituals developed in
the slave churches, which talk mostly
about heaven, not the earth in which
they have had little influence.

More recently we have seen the vast
majority of these Bible institutes shift-
ing gears to become Bible Colleges and
then to secular curricula enabling stu-
dents to go on to become attorneys,
doctors, businessmen and members of
Congress and the Senate.

This fairly recent visibility, along
with growth in numbers, then has
created the impression that ”Evangeli—
cals” have suddenly become numerous
when mostly it is a case of Evangelicals
suddenly becoming visible.

However, along with this massive,
almost century—long transition from
obscurity, Evangelicals have only
belatedly begun to rethink the earthly
dimension of the Biblical revelation.

The earlier Evangelicals now were
not only talking about what has been
dubbed ”the social gospel,” but were
making lots of use of the word ”king—
dom.” The later Evangelicals, accord-
ingly, dropped any reference to the
Kingdom of God coming on earth,
except in an evangelistic, spiritual
sense, because they believed human
conditions were supposed to go from
bad to worse. The massive social con-
cerns of the 1850s were no longer typi-
cal of their agendas.

Their one question now was, ”Are
you winning people to Christ?” Their
focus was more likely on the next
world — eschatology, prophecy, as
mentioned.

A young man named Bob Pierce
founded World Vision out of an emo-
tional and heart response to human
need. He was driven not by theology
or exegesis. Ron Sider’s book Rich
Christians in a World ofH1/inger, or
something like that tried to piece
together some theology for earthly
action. Carl Henry's now famous The
Uneasy Conscience of the Modern Panda-
mentalist arrested the attention of
many.

A good deal of good work was done
on the mission field, where intuition
often overpowered lagging theological
rationale. But it would take a long time
— and not even yet — for contemporary
mission theology to catch up with that
of the older and earlier agencies whose
missionaries established universities
on the field and often were architects
of the entire educational structure of
nations. They recognized that the very
different spheres of government, edu-
cation and commerce must all work
together if the situation in this world
will approach the full implications of
the phrase in the Lord's prayer, ”Thy
Kingdom come, thy will be done on
earth 

Ilneaas.-acalkaax-mne,page3

Ilneaas.-acalkgzax-mne,page4

I1e0mm1Raasampage5

