Eras of Mission History

Ralph D. Winter, Wednesday, June 21, 2006

It may appear that in this lesson our pur-
pose is to tell about a period of history. That
really isn't quite it. This lesson might have
been called ”Three New Frontiers of Mission
Vision.” We are going to look closely at

0 the incredible unpredictability of events
in the last 200 years,

0 the changing insights of theologians and
missionaries during that period regarding the
very nature of the task remaining.

0 in particular, we will take note of three
major changes of perspective moving us
closer to fulfilling the Gospel of the Kingdom

0 We will sharpen our wits on a number of
other changes and challenges to our conven-
tional perspectives, and

0 conclude with a quite different, more
expansive understanding of Biblical mission,
which just might be a mighty, parallel
"Fourth Era.”

Thus, rather than being a history lesson,
this will be an exercise in discerning unex-
pected vision, and what has happened in the
last 200 years when an unexpected change of

vision gains the attention of those who seek to
fulfill the Gospel of the Kingdom of God.

Our lesson just happens to be the most sig-
nificant of all fifteen lessons. It is the capstone
of the first half of the course -- which is the
foundational half. Up to now we have been
tracking a 4,000-year story of what could be
called "Operation Abraham.”

Look, this is your last chance to gain an
overall view of the big story and to see where
you fit into it!

This lesson is the final in that first half, and
brings very special excitement. True, the first
eleven chapters of Genesis refer to events
prior to "Operation Abraham,” but those few
pages are not so much the story of an unfold-
ing plan as they are a backdrop for the follow-
ing story of an unfolding plan -- namely, the
story of the rest of the Bible. Chapters 1
through 11 thus describe the complexity and
seriousness of the problem. The rest of the

Bible then describes the unfolding of the solu-
tion, a story more rapidly unfolding today
that at any previous time. Never before in
history have as many pieces of the jigsaw
puzzle been in place. We are getting to the
end of the story. There may not be another
400-year Epoch!

This unfolding, 4,000-year story does in
fact begin with Genesis 12 and Abraham, at
about 2000 BC, as you have already learned.
This is where we see the beginning of a new
plan, the main story of the Bible, a plot to
retake this planet for the Kingdom of God --
not to inform or merely educate that planet
but to recover it from the possession of a
retreating but hostile, ravaging power, the
Evil One, the one Paul called ”the god of this
world,” the One who created the Problem in
the first place. Note well that this 40-century
story is not, as it often is said to be, simply "a
story to tell to the nations.” It is a kingdom, a
power, and u glory to extend to the nations. It is a
military campaign. It is not a war against
ﬂesh and blood but against principalities and
powers. It is a war in which God is asking for
redeemed human help in the dangerous task
of destroying everything which mars and
damages God's glory. It looks forward to the
day when,

At the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in
heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every
tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory
of God the Father (Phil 2:10-11, NIV)

Tragically, these 4,000 years are rarely seen
as a single story. Sunday Schools chip away
at little pieces of it -- like ants walking on the
surface of an oil painting, seeing every detail
without getting the picture. Even seminaries
chop the story to fit into their three depart-
ments, Old Testament, New Testament, and
Church History.

What is that story and what does it
mean?
Granted that during those 4,000 years a

number of major events do occur which may
not seem to be connected, such as

Eras of Mission History, page 10

mated 700,000 short termers a year probably
drain more funds than all of the serious long-
term work combined. This factor alone must
be considered a serious drag on formal mis-
sion efforts. Worse still, when intelligent
people visit ”the mission field” unacquainted
or unadjusted to some of the scary or incon-
venient things, and without understanding
the many factors that don't meet the eye, they
may actually acquire negative thoughts about
any thought of long term service in a cross-
cultural situation, and wonder subcon-
sciously about the feasibility of cross-cultural
mission activity in general.

However, even if there might at first not
seem to be any single huge new insight
which could create a "4th Era,” (I will men-
tion one in a minute) there have been a
number of elements within the mission
movement which could reasonably be called
minor frontiers, obstacles, roadblocks,
unsolved problems.

Several of these problems have, for the
most part, been deterrents, ”sand in the
machinery” within one or more of the Three

Eras. Doing something about these minor
frontiers is just as much a part of the cause of
missions as being a career missionary. Some
of them have been and are being dealt with
by people who don't actually become career
missionaries in the usual sense.

I will just list a few of these breakthroughs
in understanding with which we have grap-
pled directly or indirectly at the U.S. Center
for World Mission.

1 Unreached Peoples

The U.S. Center for World Mission was
founded, in part, on the discovery that many
people groups still have no viable, indigenous
church community in their midst — and require
pioneering, cross-cultural outreach.

2 The Great Commission and Abraham

Early on we recognized that the Great Com-
mission first appears in Genesis 12, so that mis-
sions is clearly the basis of the entire Bible. Thus
we will likely read and apply the Bible in radi-
cally new ways.

3 From the Unfinished Task to the Finishable
Task

We later realized that, though a large chal-
lenge, it is a relatively small task to reach all
unreached peoples — in view of the enormous

global community of Christians and the many
churches available to reach each people.

4 Failure with Large Blocs and the Offsetting
Trend to "Radical Contextualization"

We also began to realize that it's not just how
many unreached peoples are left, but also that
some large blocs of peoples are superficially
touched by gospel witness — and that some
”reached” peoples aren't really reached.

5 Reverse Contextualization - the Re-
contextualization of Our Own Traditions

We have also sensed the necessity, before we
can successfully contextualize the Bible for
others, of acknowledging major philosophical or
theological flaws in our own traditions.

6 The Reclaiming of the Gospel of the Kingdom

Latter-day Evangelicals have often substituted
a mere ”Gospel of salvation” for the full-ﬂedged
Gospel of the Kingdom so vividly portrayed in
the Bible.

7 Beyond "Christianity”

We will often need to go beyond radical con-
textualization — to recognize that some people
around the world will choose to go beyond cur-
rent expressions of biblical faith now recognized
as ”Christianity.”

8 A Different Type of Missionary Recruitment

A pattern of pre-graduation ”enlisting and
guiding” is clearly superior to waiting until stu-
dents have completed university degrees and are

weighed down by heavy debt and poor curricu-
lum choices.

9 A Trojan Horse in Education?

We can make creative, strategic choices to
stem the tide of secularization in public and pri-
vate schools.

10 Needed: a Revolution in Pastoral Training

Training is often focused on the wrong stu-
dents, the wrong curriculum, or the wrong
(degree) packaging.

11 The Religion of Science

The Book of Scripture and the ”Book” of Crea-
tion have each spawned a huge, global commu-
nity of faith. Our challenge is to bridge the divide
between science and religion and to declare the
manifest glory of both His Word and His Works.

12 The Challenge of the Evil One

An intelligent Evil One hides behind disease
pathogens and other scourges often blamed on
God. We must vigorously oppose Satan, seek in
that way to glorify God, and enlist in the service

of the Son of God who ”came to destroy the
works of the devil.” .

A Real Fourth Era?

Eras of Mission History, page 11

In conclusion I will mention one other
frontier which is significant enough to create
a 4th Era if it is ever recognized as a crucial
dimension in the cause of missions.

Like the other Eras, this fourth insight aug-
ments the earlier eras. It does not deny or
conﬂict with their validity. Call it the Military
Era. It acknowledges of all the wonderful
things we constantly say about Salvation,
both temporal and eternal, Salvation being
the necessary basis on which we are called.
But we are called urgently not merely to get
others "saved” but also to get them involved
in the work of the Kingdom, which clearly
involves a war against ”the works of the
Devil.” It views Christians world wide as a
vast army already in uniform but unaware of
any very demanding, global war.

The biggest problem in explaining this
additional dimension of our reconciliation
with God is our ominous inability to see
what the enemy is doing. For example, many
believers customarily take for granted all
kinds of true horrors as if they are "just the
way it is,” or worse still, as if these horrors
are just part of ”God’s mysterious will.”

A lurid example of this kind of confusion
can be seen in Jonathan Edwards’ case when
in his missionary period he sought earnestly
to try out smallpox vaccine so as to save his
Native American charges from annual, horri-
ble scourges of smallpox.

Amazingly, the pastors of Massachusetts
with one accord (except for Cotton Mather)
opposed his idea claiming that in fighting
smallpox he would be ”interfering with
Divine Providence.” However, he went
ahead and tried the primitive vaccine on him-
self and died of smallpox the very year he
was installed as the President of what is
today Princeton University.

In other words, a major problem we face in
order to make this case is that few people are
clear about the source of all evil. The Bible
sometimes talks as if God initiates evil and
suffering. In other places it is plain that while
God works all things for good, much of the
time, as in ]ob’s case, He is making some-
thing good out of something evil Satan has
done in his free will or something man has
done in his free will.

For example, the Intelligent Design people
rightly see evidence of intelligence in nature
but do not talk of any evidence of evil design,
thus allowing a Harvard professor quite logi-
cally to say, "If the god of the Intelligent
Design people exists he is a divine sadist who
creates parasites that blind millions of
people.” If the current efforts of the Intelli-
gent Design movement lead logically to the
existence of an ugly, vicious god, is that
better than no god at all?

It is embarrassingly true that since Calvin
did not know about germs we have, even
today, no theology of germs. We cannot logi-
cally or theologically seek to destroy danger-
ous pathogens if we are not clear that it is our
Divine mandate. Thus, it would appear that
the many Orthodox Jewish doctors who are
at the forefront of microbiological research
must be employing an intuitive theology that
is superior to our formal theology!

How can we ever win intelligent, educated
people to Christ, or hold them in belief, if we
as followers of Christ are not known for
fighting against those things which otherwise
logically tear down God's glory?

Contrary to popular belief, the medical
world and the pharmaceutical world are
focused on helping sick people not on eradi-
cating the pathogens that make them sick.
Contrary to popular belief recent insights
from university researchers indicate that far
more diseases are the result of infections than
has been understood by the healing profes-
sions, such as heart disease, stroke, cancer,
multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's, and schizo-
phrenia.

Even if these killer diseases had not been
discovered to be infections by pathogens,
there is already a list of 25 eradicable diseases
which no identifiable Christian organization
in the world that I know of is seeking to erad-
icate. Christian initiative has built thousands
of hospitals and clinics, and that is well, but
joint, group-Christian initiative which fights
evil at the level of eradicating the pathogens
themselves is non-existent. We seem to be
blind in this area. Is this blindness itself a
work of Satan?

We seem to be blind in other ways. We
have mounted a multi-billion dollar cam-

Eras of Mission History, page 12

paign to fight terrorists who killed 3,000
people in one day, yet we are hardly lifting
finger against just two diseases that kill 6,000
Americans every day 365 days a year. And,
when someone gets cancer or heart disease
we usually chalk it up to one of God's mys-
terious actions. In the sphere of devastating
disease germs Evangelicals acknowledge no
war, nothing that would require a public, all-
out effort to fight. Yet leader after Christian
leader, both at home and abroad is pulled
down prematurely because of disease.

Worse still, as mentioned, evil in this
dimension is not only clearer than ever but is
routinely attributed to the initiative of God
Himself. This is the central problem: under
these circumstances we today cannot expect
truly honest, educated people to believe or to
believe for very long. The Biblical emphasis
on bringing glory to God has been trans-
formed into an Evangelical drive merely to
get human beings saved. It may seem quite
humanistic to be preoccupied with human
salvation rather than the glorification of God.

Ironically, we can only bring rural or
uneducated people to salvation unless those
who are already saved focus not only on their
salvation but on restoring the glory of God
by working together in the name of Christ to
identify and destroy the works of the Devil.
That is what 1 John 3:8 says, "The Son of God
appeared for this purpose, that He might
destroy the works of the Devil.” Is this part of
the full meaning of our prayer that ”His
Kingdom come and His will be done, on
earth as it is in heaven”?

Could this frontier mark the beginning of a
Fourth Era?

Eras of Mission History, page 2

The trek of Abraham to a new home.

The captivity of his lineage in Egypt.

The breakaway of his lineage from Egypt.
The conquest of the promised land.

The brilliance of Solomon's temple.

The challenge Nehemiah faced on return
from exile.

Up to now, the mere survival of the nation
chosen to be witnesses to the world is what
we mainly see. They did not even know there
was a planet.

Of course, we see the horror of the Cross
and the marvel of the Resurrection.

The astounding events of the day of Pente-
cost, which give glimmers of mission.

The first appearance of Biblical faith in
Greek and Latin garments.

The official acceptance of Christianity by
the Roman empire by the year 400.

The acceptance of Christianity by the
Gothic tribal basin by the year 800.

The acceptance of Christianity by the Scan-
dinavian peoples by the year 1200.

The breakout into the whole world by the
year 1600.

Note, that although the Gospel went East
as well as West, and is a fascinating story, in
the East the movement was to a great extent
either won over or overrun by Islam or com-
pletely extinguished by figures such as
Tamerlane and Genghis Khan who had
utterly no regard for human life. It does not
emerge as a major force in modern times.

Fireworks

These are all significant events, but now in
this lesson, the last two hundred years of the
fifth 400-year period following Christ, that is,
in just 1800 to 2000, we see, bursting in the
sky, a huge, blossoming, fireworks display
without parallel as virtually the whole world
as never before begins to reorganize around
Christian manners, morals, virtues, and, we
must admit, vices. That's right, our contem-
porary Christian movement is both Biblical
and less than Biblical.

What evidence is there of
progression?

It has been a long story. Positive change is
not all that easy to see. War and pestilence
kept world population down to an estimate
of 27 million in Abraham's day. Not well
understood is the fact that had war and pesti-
lence been reduced back then to what it is
now, world population would have grown to
what it is today at 6 billion in merely the next
321 years.

However, instead of rising to 6 billion in
the next 321 years it rose to only one thirtieth
of that in the next 2,000 years. That is, it rose
to 200 million at the time of Christ. Growing
from 27 million to 200 million in 2,000 years
is a rate of only 2/ 10ths of 1% per year --
almost zero.

For example, when in about 440 AD the
Roman legions withdrew from an England
that under the Romans had been literate for
three centuries, the blood and chaos that
reigned for the next 600 years prevented any
population increase at all, thanks to the inva-
sions of the vicious Anglo-Saxons and later
the even more violent Vikings.

However, within all this painful confusion
the Gospel of Christ was working its way.
Once Gutenberg released the Bible from cen-
turies of limited circulation, both war and
pestilence began steadily to decrease and
population, accordingly, steadily to pick up
speed. By 1800 AD, 18 centuries after Christ,
world population had grown 5 times what it
was in Jesus’ day. But then it grew another

five times as large in just the next two final
centuries of this final 1600 - 2000 AD period.

The Bible

The Bible itself, although representative
mainly of a single ethnic tradition, eventually
released people from that tradition, and faith
began to explode. Roman Catholic missionar-
ies had implanted a Roman version of the
faith all over the world even before Guten-
berg in 1450 but they had made very signifi-
cant gains by the time Protestants (after rum-
maging through the Bible for 200 years)
finally caught on to the Roman idea of estab-
lishing missionary organizations. In this
lesson we see essentially the story of how the
Protestants after dragging their feet for two
centuries caught up in just two centuries.

Eras of Mission History, page 3

The Five Renaissances

In one respect the final 400-year period is
no different from each of the previous four
400-year periods. Each time we saw a ﬂour-
ishing of the faith in a major new cultural
basin. For instance I have called the Fourth
Century the Classical Renaissance. Other
scholars have called the Eighth, the Twelfth,
the Sixteenth, and the Twentieth Centuries,
respectively, the Carolingian Renaissance, the
Twelfth Century Renaissance. Then we come
to THE Renaissance. In the final period, for
this lesson, we have the Evangelical Renais-
sance.

In each period the final century of renais-
sance started a bit earlier and lasted a bit
longer than the previous one. During this last
400 years the Evangelical renaissance has sur-
passed that of all earlier periods. In the last
200 years, for example, Protestants have
almost replaced the Catholic mission move-
ment due to the French Revolution cutting
Catholic mission’s financial and human
resources in Europe.

Thus, in this fifth 400-year period (1600-

2000) and especially in the last half of it, from
roughly the year 1800 on, we step into a new,
final, and unprecedented period. Note that
these last four centuries are not merely
crowded with many significant events. The
final two centuries in our 40-century story
ARE an event.

These centuries do not merely surge with
smaller and totally unexpected events. They
swirl with more people, more doings, more
literature, more discoveries, specifically an
enormously better understanding of nature,
than all of the previous 3,800 years put
together. Today, furthermore, we also know
a hundred times more details of this period
than we know of any earlier period. The
chaos of history has declined and we
humans, many of us redeemed, have pre-
served more of our own story.

Obviously it is easy to get lost in those
details, fascinating though they may be,
seeing the trees and not the forest. We don't
want to be just loaded with interesting infor-
mation. We want to know What Is Going On!
What is really happening, because we want to
participate strategically in that story. We are not

interested in merely "keep’n busy for Jesus.”
We want to know Him better, we want to do
not what we want to do but to fit in with His
plans, His purposes. We pray, "Thy kingdom
come, Thy will be done,” don't we?

The dynamics

So, let's step back for a moment and get a
quick look at some of the dynamics of our
1800-2000 AD period.

In the first 400 years the most significant
mission to peoples outside of the Mediterra-
nean basin, were heretics expelled beyond
the borders of the Roman empire.

By 800, the huge tribal sphere north of the
Mediterranean was dotted with literally hun-

dreds of what could be called mission sta-
tions -- both Celtic and Benedictine.

By 1200 AD, or shortly after the Friars
were talking about planetary evangelization
even if they did not know much about the
planet. The founder of the Dominicans, in
1210 AD was reading to his new followers
the Great Commission of Matthew 28.

However, by the beginning of the 1600-
2000 period, Islam not Christianity had
encompassed a third of the world, with more
adherents than all Christians put together.
Muslims did not think they had to educate
people in theology. They simply educated
them in obedience.

By 1600 Protestantism had been born, yet
not only Muslims but Catholic Friars (Fran-
ciscans and Dominicans) as well as the much
younger movement known as the Jesuits,
were the ones who were all over the world in
serious and often effective evangelization of a
one type or another.

Unfortunately we must wait another 200
years to 1800 AD for Protestants to awaken to
the missionary theme of the Bible.

The period from Abraham to 1600 AD is
already complex enough for neither secular
nor Christian scholars to try very often to see
it as a single story. But during 1600 to 2000 it
is as if the civilization of Europe explodes
across the planet. Christianity now emerges
with twice as many followers as Islam, and
curiously, despite the centuries of Islamic
superiority in medicine, scholarship, com-

Eras of Mission History, page 4

merce, and statesmanship, Christianity by
now is moving much faster, and is now on a
unique and sleek surfboard of science, educa-
tion, economic power and sheer global domi-
nation.

The very extensive Catholic penetration of
what is now the Southeastern USA was to
disappear from sight mainly due to European
diseases. The California Missions of first the
Jesuits and then the Franciscans fared a little
better on that score, being overrun by the
Gold Rush and the seizure of California by
the US Army.

Pilgrims and the Puritans in the Northeast
of the USA displaced the Indians with less
violence. Imagine missionary work going on
in California after the State decided in 1852 to
pay a bounty of $25 ($2,500 today) to anyone
who would bring in the scalp or the ears of
an Indian. That law was on the books for 50
years.

In the middle of the 1700s the Great Awak-
ening took place leading directly to the Dec-
laration of Independence and the Revolution-
ary War. That war was not truly ended until
1812, after which, and in view of the Loui-
siana purchase, citizens of the new country
felt they could safely stream inland and take
over land permanently.

By 1850 huge revivals had encompassed
the new nation, heightening consciences and
leading directly to the Civil War, better called
the War Between the States. That war elimi-
nated so many men that women had to take
over the farms, the businesses, and the banks,
and they founded, as well, a number of col-
leges for women going out as missionaries,
such as Wellesley, Radcliffe, Bryn Mar, Smith
College, etc. By 1900 there were 40 mission
agencies run by women.

By 1900 in both England and America, the
Evangelical Awakening, and its aftermath in
successive awakenings, had created enough
honest people to allow the industrial phe-
nomenon of mass production. In America an
expanding catalog of revived and honest
believers greatly accelerated commerce
across the Appalachians. That catalog today
is put out by Dunn and Bradstreet.

By 1900 immigration of unrevived Euro-
peans was to double and triple the popula-

tion of the USA, spelling the end of civil and
governmental involvement of Evangelicals,
but not the end of missions as their minority
concern. In 1900 the President of the United
States gave the opening speech at a huge
Carnegie Hall meeting of nationwide leaders
concerned about world missions. Never
again has that happened.

The last great consensus about missions on
the part of the mainline denominations
declined after the First World War, and was a

shadow of its former self by the end of the
Second World War.

Order out of chaos?

Isn't this all pretty confusing? How can we
see any order, any progression in this final,
renaissance of the 1600 to 2000 period? Isn't it
just too complicated?

In this lesson the Three Eras we will see
present a picture almost unknown to the sec-
ular world, a picture that is both simple and
yet powerful. It explains more of the other-
wise bewildering details than anything else,
yet it is paradoxically invisible to most schol-
ars. In this period, spectacularly, the globe
has come to know what was previously
unknown: literacy, schools, hospitals, univer-
sities, governmental structures, yes, even a
scientific world view that derives from Bibli-
cal perspective, of a God who is the Creator
of all things, and even stable, discoverable
laws. Here we see an immense setback of
superstition. Despite European cynicism
about political morality, we see global agree-
ment against aggression, genocide, torture
and rigid, oppressive class stratification, and
specifically terrorism. As the sociologist
Rodney Stark says in his incredibly impor-
tant book, For the Glory of God, every virtue in
today's world came about because of people
who sought the glory of God. I would urge
you to believe that that is true.

Fog on the windshield

However, one reason we can't see that the
Gospel is not a marginal phenomenon but
the very prime mover in the world today is
due to brainwashing both massive and selec-
tive. Even the much deplored colonial phe-
nomenon essentially created the nation-states

Eras of Mission History, page 5

of the non-western world. Commercial ven-
tures and missionaries preceded the exten-
sion of European colonial authority. In most
cases the "colonial afterthought” came into
being reluctantly and mainly because of mis-
sionary complaints about commercial firms’
mistreatment of national workers.

For example, when India converted from
an industrial preserve of the British East
India Company into a British colony, the Brit-
ish field administrators in India were for the
most part striking models of integrity, widely
missed today. The missionaries were the con-
science. Local wars were suppressed, dis-
eases were reduced. Population began to
shoot up. Schools, hospitals, agricultural
activities were introduced.

But Marxist and leftist mantras about
imperialism have disguised all this.

For example, the United Nations has pub-
lished a compilation the size of a telephone
book entitled Education in Africa. It lists thou-
sands of schools. Not one line mentions mis-
sion origins, yet virtually all of the schools in
Africa are there due to missionary initiative.
A full 85% are due to the direct initiative of
missions. In Latin America the largest techni-
cal university was founded by missionaries.
In all of Asia the largest agricultural technical
center is in Allahabad, a university founded
by missionaries. And, today the Allahabad
stadium resounds each week with the voices
of tens of thousands of Christian believers.

By contrast, virtually all non-mission
efforts to rescue nations and fight poverty,
whether World Bank schemes or superficial
religious good works have broken down
because of selfishness, dishonesty, or lack of
true concern. Character and integrity gener-
ated classically by the missions is almost
always the fatally missing ingredient.

The Three Eras of Mission Vision

One way to organize the complexity of
these final 200 years is to note three periods
each of which is set off by the stirring glim-
mer of new awareness of an untouched mis-
sion frontier. These new beginnings are not
immediately new bursts of mission activity
because each time the energizing vision only
crawled into existence. However, each era is

marked off by brand new insight into what is
required by mission in the Name of Christ,
and those insights are our primary concern.

We can begin by noticing a young man
named William Carey who was extremely
unlikely to be a leader, from a little-known
town in Northern England, and with very
little education. He has already sparked into
existence indirectly seven new Protestant
mission agencies and he himself is at work by
1800 AD in Serampore, a Danish coastal
enclave in today's India. The delay of Protes-
tants in becoming concerned and responsible
for the whole world is something we have
already mentioned. Carey's vision comes at
precisely the moment Protestants get control
of the seas, and at precisely the moment the
Roman Catholic mission movement is under-
cut, as mentioned, by the orgy of the French
Revolution and its aftermath in the ravaging
of Europe by Napoleon's armies.

The First Era

The first of our three eras, the William
Carey Era, had a goal that was no more spe-
cific than to "get out there,” and it can by
default be characterized by the fact that its
missionaries mainly dug in no further than
coastal territories. Yet his book mapped out
statistically the entire unreached world.

The Second Era

But by 1865, after 65 years, a new and
more specific awareness of need arose as
another young man, James Hudson Taylor,
attempted to rally mission forces around the
radical idea of going inland. He also encour-
aged a number of new missions to be
founded -- even more successfully than
Carey -- this time all of them pledged to
move beyond coastal areas to the inland peo-
ples.

But there was a problem. Earlier mission
leaders were not happy with young Taylor's
idea. He had been in China a few years. He
pretty much knew what he was doing, but
his idea of going inland to most people
seemed crazy at that time of history. Only
Catholic missionaries had done it, because
they did not have wives and children. One
leader sternly warned him, "Hudson, if you

Eras of Mission History, page 6

take young people inland their blood will be
upon your shoulders.” Taylor was shocked.
This stopped him. He wandered in a daze
until he felt God telling him, "Hudson, you
are not sending young people inland. I am.”

That's all it took. He went into London
and opened a bank account under the name,
"China Inland Mission.” Thus was born the
era for Protestants that emphasized going
beyond the coastlands. Earlier pioneers, of
course, were not blind. It may well be that
the new inland frontiers could not have as
easily been penetrated earlier.

Nevertheless confusion remained. The
older missions had worked beyond both the
pioneer stage and the paternal stage during
which expatriates were still the ones teaching
national leaders. The older agencies were
now sending personnel out to be equal part-
ners with national leaders involved in
expanding the number of existing churches,
no longer in pioneer missions. They were even
feeling forced to give up the pattern of equal
partnership and proceed to a fourth stage
where the national churches, if they wish (but
only if they wish) invite expatriate workers to
come and merely participate in a national
church movement now guided entirely by
national workers, no longer led by expatri-
ates at all, even as equal partners. And, maybe
the older-agency people could not even
remember their own earlier pioneer efforts of
an earlier generation. Maybe they even
thought that the pioneer and paternal stages
were a mistake.

(Mission Station Approach)

For example, the much maligned "Mission
Station Approach” may be the only and best
thing to do in certain circumstances. Donald
McGavran of whom we will see more in a
minute, disparaged the "Mission Station
Approach,” but remember he was a third-
generation missionary. What he promoted in
his day was not necessarily possible earlier.
Early strategies are a mistake in the later
stages. Later strategies are a mistake in the
earlier stages.

Note that Taylor planned to go where
there were no Christians at all. His work was
distinctly, and of necessity, pioneer and pater-

nal, not yet partnership or participation. As
other "inland” agencies facing pioneer and
paternal stages were founded there came into
being a whole new sphere of activity eventu-
ally dominated by the vision of the newer,
"inland” agencies. Following the pattern of
the China Inland Mission (today called the
Overseas Mission Fellowship) there appeared
the Africa Inland Mission, the Heart of Africa
Mission, the Sudan Interior Mission, the
Regions Beyond Missionary Union, etc. These
all tended to be new, amateurish, small,
mainly interdenominational, and they did
some very unwise things -- just as most of the
older agencies did when they started out.

In my thinking it is well to mark the year
Taylor opened a bank account under the
name "China Inland Mission” as the milepost
beginning the 2nd Era. But that did not end
the 1st Era. It has seemed to me that 45 years
later is a fitting milestone marking the termi-
nation of the 1st Era -- the coastlands era.
Why? That was the year of the remarkable
conference in Edinburgh in 1910, the most
famous mission conference in history, an his-
toric "first.” By that time the word "inland”
no longer was so risky or such a shocker.

We thus have a 45-year "transition”
between 1865 when the China Inland Mission
got started to the meeting in 1910. During
this transition the new pioneering agencies
came up to speed despite arguments about
strategy, making their case, and eventually
experiencing the same third and fourth
stages of mission strategy themselves.

Edinburgh 1910 was a global level meeting
to which no one technically was invited by the
conference conveners -- the only people who
attended were delegates chosen by their own
mission agencies. Both China and India had
already very helpfully convened (and mod-
eled) field level conferences of this type --
that is, constituted exclusively of mission
agency people not necessarily church leaders.
Those meetings got work done. They grap-
pled with problems that would have had to
be lengthily explained to church leaders.

No global Christian conference has ever
generated so many scholarly studies both
before and after the meeting. Not until 1980
was there another meeting like that, the

Eras of Mission History, page 7

World Consultation on Frontier Missions,
again at Edinburgh. A significant difference
from 1910 is that by 1980 a full third of the
delegates came from new Third World Mis-
sions. I am thus using the milepost of 1980 as
the symbolic end of the Second, inland, era.
The two reasons are that by 1980, and then
also because of the 1980 conference, practically
every agency was expected to take
"unreached peoples” seriously.

You can easily wonder why after adding
"inland” territories to the ”coastlands” there
would need to be a 3rd era. Finishing the task
was on everyone’s lips. Some mission socie-
ties thought that by planting a church in
every country the job would be finished. But
there were units smaller than countries, and
some of these peoples had unintentionally
been by-passed. Even in the 3rd era of the
unreached peoples a few thought that "A
church for every people” would complete the
Great Commission, not just complete the
essential "missiological breakthrough” to
every people.

The Third Era

The beginning of the 3rd Era is really best
symbolized by two men this time. Donald
McGavran, at work in India discerned and
explained the significance of what could be
called "vertical segmentation” of societies --
in his case the caste system in India. His
inﬂuence culminated in the School of World
Mission at Fuller.

Cameron Townsend, on the other hand,
dropped out of college to fulfill his SVM
pledge. He ran into horizontally segmented
tribal societies in Guatemala, and was con-
verted by some of the older missionaries to
taking their different Mayan dialects very
seriously. His influence culminated in one of
the largest mission agencies, the Wycliffe
Bible Translators.

By contrast McGavran pointed out the
more invisible reality -- social "layers,” meta-
phorically speaking, which could not sensi-
bly, in the beginning, be mixed in a single
congregation any more than two different
tribes with different languages can practically
be mixed in the same congregation. It is a
virtue not a vice that the Bible allows and

even encourages people to belong to a Chris-
tian fellowship which honors their language
and culture, that is to say an indigenous
church. Otherwise, what does it mean to take
culture seriously in missions? McGavran pro-
moted the concept of "a people movement to
Christ.” If a new believing community is
truly indigenous those outside of it (but
within the same larger people) will identify
those now following Christ as still belonging
to the larger community. This is a stringent
test. Many missionary church plants would
not qualify!

But that idea, today often called an
”Insider Movement,” is clearly Biblical no
matter how shocking. The New Testament
allowed Greeks and Romans to retain a good
deal of their language and culture. It then
seems only fair, and Biblical, today that we
allow Muslims and Hindus to retain a good
deal of their culture. In one country there are
now hundreds of thousands of devout fol-
lowers of Christ who still consider them-
selves part of a Muslim culture. In India it
has gone even further. Estimates are that
more than 14 million followers of Christ --
true Bible believers -- are still within Hindu
society.

Do they still follow other gods? No. Do
they have to call themselves Christians? No,
although they can if they want. But note that
believers in the New Testament never called
themselves Christians. That was an outsiders’
sneer word! Judging by Western forms of
Christianity, would believers still within the
Hindu cultural sphere enhance their spiritu-
ality and their understanding of the Bible if
they were to adopt for themselves a sneer
word which eventually became the official
Constantinian tag for a political party?

The word Christian in India today is again
a governmental classification which includes
millions of very nominal members. Take
France for an example. Something like 80% of
French citizens consider themselves Chris-
tians even though the same poll shows that
only 20% of the French believe in God! Does

it help for them to call themselves Christian?

However, if Greek, Latin, German, Eng-
lish, Japanese, Hindu and Muslim cultures
need to be taken seriously, both Townsend

Eras of Mission History, page 8

and McGavran proved that thousands of
smaller groups live and move and have their
being within smaller cultural traditions that
are every bit as crucial -- in fact far more cru-
cial to them than it is to be a considered a
Muslim or a Hindu. These smaller groups are
often by-passed, overlooked, or assumed to
be on their way momentarily to give up their
cultural heritage for that of a trade language
or a national language.

However, just as Mao Zedong was unable
to get all 100 million Cantonese speakers in
South China to speak his brand of Mandarin,
so no national government in India has ever
been able to make Hindi the native tongue of,
say, those millions who speak Tamil, or
Telegu in South India. In both India and
China the language most avidly studied is
English.

Indeed, unlike the first two eras, the 3rd
Era hinges not on a geographical definition of
a new frontier but turns on much more subtle
differences of language, class, and culture.
This has made the cause of missions both
easier and harder. Easier, on the one hand,
because dealing with one single "unreached
people” is much more likely to succeed than
at first to expect diverse peoples to mix easily
in the same congregation. On the other hand,
harder because instead of having to deal with
the nations (meaning the hundred or so coun-
tries of the world), we now have to deal with
these thousands of far smaller "nations”
(which are ethnically and culturally defined
groups) -- some containing millions of people,
others merely thousands, but none defined
by geography.

Furthermore, as expected, once again, the
older missions of the 2nd Era are still heavily
involved in the 3rd and 4th stages (Partner-
ship and Participation) while those which
seek out unreached peoples are necessarily
having to relearn the earlier techniques of the
1st and 2nd stages (Pioneer and Paternal).

As before, therefore, the 3rd Era has
crawled into existence. But generally speak-
ing missionaries and mission executives are
some of the most alert people in the world,
and the 3rd Era, the unreached-people fron-
tier, soon came with a rush. By 1980 the new
vision of by-passed small groups had been

widely understood. However, will there be a
4th Era?

A Fourth Era?

It is a bit hard to imagine that there will
ever be some new insight that is as significant
as these three frontiers, since together these
three insights literally include every human
being in the world. However, we shall see.

Cities

Some have nevertheless said that a focus
on cities should be considered a 4th Era.
People moving to cities does not necessarily
blot out their ethnic awareness even though
new ”socio-peoples” do emerge enabling a
very specific evangelism which will later pen-
etrate the source people groups. Thus, even
in cities missionaries usually do well to be
concerned about ethnic people groups retain-
ing their culture. Cities are to some extent
simply another place where unreached peo-
ples need to be taken seriously.

Handicapped

Others have said that the handicapped of
the world, the blind, the deaf, and the dis-
abled ought to be a 4th Era. Some have said a
renewed emphasis on children is due the
respect of providing a new”era” of vision
and mission.

Short Terms

Still others point to the massive numbers
of young and old who are going on two-week
"short terms.” This indeed is a phenomenon,
and it is a new era of sorts. But it has little to
do with a new vision or a new frontier.

It is important to note that our three eras
are not necessarily eras which began with a
rush of new missionaries going to the field. If
that were the criterion defining these eras we
would have had to mark off a new era begin-
ning just after the Second World War, when
in just five years 150 new agencies were
founded. These new agencies were mainly
support or service agencies giving aid to
existing agencies and existing work. They did
not focus on some new frontier of vision or
need, and thus in our typology do not mark
off a new era.

Student movements and the Eras?

Eras of Mission History, page 9

It is worth noting that in all three eras stu-
dent movements rose up to enhance those
eras. But the students were not specifically
attracted by the characteristic new vision of
their eras. The student movements seem only
to have happened when they did. There were
some connections.

The so-called Haystack Prayer Meeting
moved five students toward the field. Later,
counseled by their seminary professors they
successfully pushed for the founding of what
has been called the first foreign mission
agency organized in America (the American
Board of Commissioners for Foreign Mis-
sions).

Few who tell the haystack story explain
that the reason these five students were pray-
ing outdoors in the first place was because at
Williams College shortly after 1800, due to
the secularistic idealism of the French Revo-
lution, student animosity toward any kind of
religious faith was quite hostile. Even when it
started to rain they did not come in out of the
rain. A haystack which cows have eaten
around begins to look like a huge mushroom
and you can in fact take refuge from the rain
under its hollowed-out edges, which they
did. The conditions were such that they had
to write their prayer diaries in code. They
formed a very low key movement called the
Society for Missionary Inquiry (SMI), which
proliferated to other campuses and was still
in existence almost a hundred years later
when the larger and even more famous Stu-
dent Volunteer Movement for Foreign Mis-
sions took over and built upon those little
SMI cells on the college campuses.

Thus, the SMI fueled the 1st Era and the
SVMFM (usually just SVM) fueled the 2nd
Era. In the case of the 3rd Era, the SVM had
already died down before it really got
started, even though both Townsend and
McGavran were themselves products of it. By
the time they got their bearings on the field
(50 years after the beginning of the SVM) and
thought their new unreached peoples
thoughts, the SVM was dead, due in part to
faulty board structure.

I. Christy Wilson, Jr. the son of missionar-
ies was able to persuade the InterVarsity
movement to add a missionary convention to

their program. The first such conference was
in Toronto in 1946. (I was at that convention).
The next few years were in the university sta-
dium at Urbana, Illinois. When they outgrew
that they chose an indoor football stadium in
St. Louis, Missouri.

However, InterVarsity’s secondary interest
in the mission movement has not at all been
comparable to the power of the exclusively
missionary SVM of the 2nd Era. Their stu-
dent work does mutate to the Student For-
eign Mission Fellowship when sponsored on
the campuses of Christian Colleges , but with
InterVarsity interest in mission may disap-
pear almost entirely on the secular campuses
where the vast bulk of their staff are located.

Campus Crusade, by comparison, not only
works on foreign campuses but in its Jesus-
Film ministry has a major thrust of mission
outreach to populations other than students
around the world. Even so, the relatively few
of their staff who join standard agencies may
accomplish as much or more than their mag-
nificent but transient forays with the Jesus
film.

Thus, in all three eras student movements
have been helpfully involved. However in no
case have those movements created the new
mission vision characterizing and defining
one of the Three Eras. Sad to say, both the
Student Volunteer movement and today's
Short Term movement have been generally
oblivious to authentic missiological issues.
The SVM people did not study the advanced
insights of the 19th Century and took thirty
or more years to relearn those earlier insights
-- about the indigenous church for example.
Short termers, a small percentage of them, do
work with missionaries, and, if they don't go
in groups, and if they stay longer than two
weeks, are of some help. Otherwise most
short termers learn a great deal but not about
missions, and in general do not become mis-
sionaries. Their trips abroad may even make
them more fearful than ever about a call to
mission service.

Thus, student movements have not in
themselves ever constituted a new era,
although they have to some extent fueled the
various eras.

Furthermore, today, in general, the esti-

