The Mission of the Local Church

Ralph D, Winter
Sunday, January 28, 2007

I am always delighted to be with Christian
leaders who represent the exuberant Chris-
tian movement in Korea. What an astounding
change has taken place in Korea in the last
hundred years!

Today, Koreans are not just focused on
that one penninsula but on the whole world.
Many good things come from Korea today,
blessing the whole world. It is significant that
South Koreans earn ten times as much per
person as North Koreans.

But Koreans everywhere in the world are
noted for being energetic, productive and
visionary.

My topic, given to me by the leaders of
this conference, concerns the mission of the
local congregation. This is exciting and signif-
icant. The Bible talks much more about the
activity of local congregations than of indi-
viduals. Almost the entire Christian move-
ment we see in the New Testament consists
of ”ecclesias,” which are home—centered fel-
lowships. This brings me to my first point
that the first ”mission” of the local church is
to build and foster family units.

Mission One: The Family

If the families in a congregation crumble,
the whole church is weakened.

It is surprising to the average Evangelical
that the NT ecclesias were home based,
family—centered fellowships. They were not
week—end ”associations” as in America
today, which are often a loose collection of
isolated individuals from many different
families. American ”churches” attract indi-
viduals. Families in America are less impor-
tant. Asia, Africa, and Latin America recog-
nize the family, especially the intergenerational
family as a more durable and significant
group than is the case in the United States,
where, by contrast, individuality has harm-
fully been made more important.

In many mission fields church member-

ship is by family. Whole families join at the
same time.

It is important for people of Asian back-
ground to realize that in America both ”indi—
vidualization” and age ”stratification” are
serious perversions of God's intention. These evil
tendencies of individualization and stratifica-
tion drastically damage the fellowship, the
productivity and the mission impact of local
churches.

How did this happen to America and what
can pastors and churches do about these ter-
rible tendencies?

Young people in America spend most of
their time each week in schoolrooms where
they are both separated from others who are
older or younger and where they are treated
as individuals whose separate grades and per-
formance are more important than any group
activity, group accomplishment, or group
achievement. Only in some sports activities
do young people work together for a
common aim.

In church it might be considered to allow
young people to help in the church services,
reading the scripture, leading in prayer,
giving testimonies, being recognized for their
birthdays and even school achievements.
They can report world events which affect
the Christian movement and the progress of
the Kingdom.

However, in my thinking the most impor-
tant thing a pastor can do is to make sure all
of the members are part of spiritually healthy
families. What goes on daily in homes is more

important than what goes on weekly in
church.

Daily family devotions and worship is
important. However, every week the families
ought to conduct a special family spiritual
time that will involve the participation of
young and old. It is a terribly weak faith that
is evident only on Sunday. The Mormons

The [Mission of the Local Church, page 10

The [Mission of the Local Church, page 2

annually publish an excellent book which
contains 52 plans for weekly family gather-
ings. It is sad that Evangelicals do not do the
same. It is possible that the Mormon book
could give a lot of hints and ideas about how
to have a weekly family time of prayer, Bible
study and singing.

Many churches encourage their young
people to go on ”Short—Term Missions.” This
is helpful but even more helpful is when
whole families visit mission work either in
the United States or in Mexico.

Finally, pastors must encourage young
people to respect their parents and to reject
the American pattern of disrespect. One
reason for the growth of disrespect is due to
the degree of isolation of children from their
parents. For most of the week children and
parents are separated from each other by
school and jobs.

”Homeschooling” helps keep a family
close together. If there are family activities of
various kinds that helps. Unfortunately, even
when a child comes home from school,

”homework” from school often keeps the
child in an ”individual” activity isolated from
the family.

It is sometimes possible for a child to go
with his father or mother to visit the work the
parents do. One summer when I was twelve
years old my father invited me to go to work
with him. All day long I wandered around
the engineering office which he was in charge
of and I got to know my father much better
that way. In reverse, some schools arrange
special days when parents can come to school
with one of their children.

Nothing is as effective as the fortunate
family that can work together in a family
business. Americans don’t like this. In my
home town years ago a family from Vietnam
ran Baskin—Robbins ice cream store. The
younger children helped out. The older chil-
dren actually served customers. But when the
city government found out what was going
on they forced the family to exclude their
children from participating.

It has been said that ”the family that prays

together stays together.” That, in fact, is often
untrue. More significant is ”the family that
works together stays together.”

Children need to see their parents doing
things that are important. Otherwise their
teachers at school appear to be smarter and
disrespect begins to grow that way. If our
young people are pulled into worldly enter-
tainment, foolish pursuits, computer games,
silly pastimes Mission is damaged. Mission is
impossible if our children are not growing up
in their honesty, their willingness to love and
to be helpful, their understanding of the mis-
sion of ]esus Christ—”to destroy the works of
the Devil” in the process of glorifying God
among all the peoples of the world.

This is the most important concern of the
local church. By contrast, common church
goals of attendance, giving, and activities are
less important than what goes on in the fami-
lies. However, what goes on at our church
buildings is still very important. Let us look
at that now.

Mission Two: Church Activities

We have already seen how churches can
incorporate young people into their church
services. They can encourage families to
accept responsibilities as a group. If the
church is trying to help a poor family or help
an elderly person clean house, it may be that
an entire family could do that together.

However, in this brief paper there is not
time or space to describe the many things
which a congregation can do as a congrega-
tion. I would like to recommend a book and
present the main points this book mentions. I
have no desire to criticize what is normally
thought of for the local church. I do want to
bring out some additional perspectives, and
even some which are different from those of
this book. First let me introduce a new book.

This book is still in the publishing process,
but it is one that I recommend highly, even
though I see things somewhat differently at
certain points. It is by ]ames R. Eby, and its
title is World Impacting Churches. Its subtitle
is, Ten Essential Characteristics for Changing the

The A/Iission of the Local Church, page 3

World and Finishing the Great Commission. I
will list those ten characteristics.

But those ten chapters of Eby’s book are
preceded by four introductory chapters. Inci-
dentally each chapter concludes with a list of
”Practical Applications” which include
resources and web sites to consult.

Chapter One, ”God’s Vision for the
World,” presents the purposes of God.

Chapter Two, ”The Passion of the Christ,”
points out that Iesus’ passion was not merely
the Cross.

Chapter Three, ”Understanding the Mis-
sionary Task,” is a very helpful description of
nine concepts: mission, missionary, unreached
people, closure, etc..

Chapter Four, ”A Tale of Two Churches,”
describes the differences between two con-
gregations, one with true ”World Impact.”

From here on he presents in ten chapters
the ten characteristics of a ”World Impacting
Church, or a ”Great Commission Church”:

Characteristic #1: ”Sense of Destiny”: Such

churches ”have a strong awareness that there
is a Divine call from God upon them to par-
ticipate with Him in building His Kingdom.”

Characteristic #2: ”Perseverance in Prayer
and Intercession”: Such churches ”know the
power of prayer, they know how to pray and
they pray.”

Characteristic #3: ”Passion for Evangel-
ism”: Such churches have members ”capture
the passion for lost people that motivated the
life of Christ.” Four keys to effective evangel-
ism are given.

Characteristic #4: ”Ministering with Super-
natural Power”: Such churches understand
that ”the Kingdom of God” is coming, and
that the ”spread of the Kingdom” includes
mighty works of God.

Characteristic #5: ”Effectively Discipling
New Converts”: Such churches ”understand
that the essence of Iesus’ command in the
Great Commission is to make disciples and
not just to win people to Christ or to see them
baptized.” The author gives a host of sugges-
tions on how to disciple not just teach.

Characteristic #6: ”Dedication to Church
Planting”: Such churches plant multiple
branch churches and house fellowships and
train many of their people to be able to do so.
In this case, the author is thinking of a local
church as becoming a mission agency. I will
comment on this below.

Characteristic #7: ”Commitment to Finish
the Great Commission”: Such churches have
a clear idea that, along with the entire global
workforce of Iesus, they are actually ﬁnishing
the job. They believe in ”closure.” This chap-
ter is packed with statistics proving the feasi-
bility of such vision.

Characteristic #8: ”Clear strategy for
Growth and Expansion”: Such churches ”Do
not grow because their circumstances are
conducive to growth or because other
churches are growing in their area. They
grow in almost any set of circumstances
because they have a passion to reach lost
people and a wise plan for growth and
increase.”

This characteristic, along with #6 pre-
sumes that the local church will act like a
mission agency. See comment below.

Characteristic #9: ”Sending Trained Labor-
ers into the Harvest”: Such churches ”Send
trained laborers into the harvest fields.” This
chapter also conceives of the local church as a
mission agency. See comment below.

Characteristic #10: ”Giving Generously to
World Evangelization”: Such churches
should give a minimum of ten percent of
their income to ”world evangelization” and
then continue to give a higher percentage
until they are giving thirty percent. Ways of
increasing giving are described.

The very next chapter, ”Together We Can
Finish the Great Commission” highlights
nine positive factors in the global situation:

1. The global prayer movement.
2. The targeting of Unreached Peoples.

3. The emergence of mission efforts from
the former mission fields themselves.

4. The pentecostal/ charismatic explosion.
5. The re—emergence of ”power evangel-

The [Mission of the Local Church, page 4

ism” (signs, wonders, healings and miracles).

6. The technological explosion (radio, TV,
computers).

7. Fast and affordable travel, bringing
Short Term Missions into existence and ena-
bling the field situation to be brought closer
to the churches back home.

8. The birth of Church Planting Move-
ments of a special and new variety.

9. The translation of scripture.

The final chapter is a ringing challenge to
the reader to be completely given over to the
Great Commission.

Mission Three: Mission Agency
Activity
In the previous paragraphs I have covered
a fairly comprehensive picture of what the
goals of mission are and the role of the local

church, as stated in an excellent book which
will soon be available.

One major difference of opinion which I
have with this book is not so much what it
says as what it does not say. What I believe
needs to be added is not so much a criticism
of this book as it is to widespread perspec-
tives which tend to dominate peoples’ think-
ing about missions today. In this book there
is no reference to mission agencies.

Local churches are growing where they are
planted all over the world today and their
multiplication is a wonderful reality. But the
unfinished task also requires thousands of
new breakthroughs to unreached peoples on
a cross—cultural basis, which is a task mainly
beyond the capabilities of local churches.

In this book almost nothing is said about
the necessary task of learning a strange lan-
guage. Almost nothing is said about the need
for many more long term workers who can
stay for ten or twenty or thirty years. Instant
results tend to be glorified. Nothing is said
about the fact that most all of the expansion
of churches has never effectively penetrated
the major remaining blocs of peoples, the
Muslims, the Hindus, Buddhists, etc.

Minority or oppressed populations will

jump at the chance to tie in with some foreign
body of believers. They have nothing to lose.
Well—established groups like the Iapanese
simply have not sensed the need to accept a
different culture in order to gain a promise of
heaven.

Rural people, uneducated people, people
who seek Western ways, many city people,
can be drawn into congregations that may
represent primarily quite Western culture.
But the vast masses of Hindus, Muslims, ]ap—
anese, and Buddhists have not yet seen their
way clear to ”become Christians.”

Let's take the Muslims as an example.
Their concept of Christians is distorted by
American movies, by the high divorce rates
in the USA, by our drinking populations, and
so on. To persuade them to be a Christian
sometimes is successful only if the Muslim
wants to drink alcoholic beverages. Within
many Muslim communities in the Middle
East today a ”Christian” reminds them of an
elderly bearded priest who is drunk all day.
Or, they are reminded of a miniskirted tour-
ist.

It is shocking but true that many Muslims,
when they think of a Christian, think of these
words: westerner, imperialist, colonial,
loosely dressed, wine drinker, pig eater,
immoral, polytheistic and infidel.

It is sad to hear but many of the Christians
in Egypt would prefer to live within the
Muslim society of Egypt than in America.

There is, therefore, a strong movement of
mission leaders today who are going back to
the Apostle Paul as an example of a mission-
ary who reached out to Greeks and wel-
comed them to follow ]esus Christ without
requiring them to give up their Greek cul-
ture. Paul was wise enough to do that
because he grew up in a Greek city. He was
bilingual. To achieve what he was able to
understand most missionaries need years of
language and culture learning.

The idea is that Muslims can follow Christ
just as Greeks could follow Christ—without
giving up their culture and their society. Rad-
ical changes of life take place when a person

The [Mission of the Local Church, page 5

repents, and turns to ]esus as Lord and
Savior. But the Bible does not say that a
person needs to give up his language and
culture as well. Greek culture was ”an
earthen vessel” which was nevertheless fully
adequate to carry the treasure of the Gospel.

Today there are hundreds of thousands of
Muslims who are earnest followers of ]esus
Christ and yet who still retain their identity
as ”Muslims.” There are even more Hindus
who have surrendured their lives to Christ
but who still consider themselves to be
”Hindus.” In fact, in India today there may
be two or three times as many devout follow-
ers of Christ who consider themselves still
part of their Hindu families as the number of
believers who call themselves Christians. The
reason is that most of the Christians of India
represent a decidedly different cultural tradi-
ton, and are significantly Westernized.

However, most ”missions” to India are
content to deal just with those who call them-
selves Christians. The Christians need help.
It is a good thing to do because the Christians

represent millions of very poor people. But
the hundreds of millions of Hindus are not
likely to merge with that group, certainly not
very soon.

In any case it is not good enough just to
contact ”Christians” in India. We need to go
to advance the cause of Christ among other
spheres of India.

One of the key movements today among
mission leaders is called the Insider Move-
ment. This is an approach, somewhat like
what I have already described Paul the apos-
tle doing, which understands the Gospel as
the treasure we carry in ”earthen vessels.”
The vessels themselves represent the culture
and the language differences around the
world. There are many different vessels, but
there is only one Gospel and we need to real-
ize that we are preaching Christ and not the
earthen vessel called Christianity or Presby-
terianism.

Missions today is often mainly an effort to
be in touch with believers in other countries
rather than an attempt to extend the Gospel

where there are no believers. In some cases it
is as if the Great Commission has been
rewritten to say, ”Go into all the world and
meddle in the existing churches.” Many
churches are involved in ”playing missions”
as if it is a curious game. They send their
young people on short visiting trips but they
do not know how to penetrate the major
blocs of Hindus, Muslims, Buddhists, ]apa—
nese etc.

Furthermore, if local churches send their
own missionaries directly to the field those
missionaries will often be very poorly pre-
pared and often be working alone rather than
with a whole field team as would be the case
if the church sent their people under the aus-
pices of a standard mission agency.

Unfortunately many churches are so inde-
pendent of all other churches that they can’t
imagine mixing their missionaries with mis-
sionaries from other churches. This is a terri-
ble mistake. Even a very large church, unless
it establishes a mission agency within the
church that draws upon leadership with
extensive field experience, will find that their
missionaries don’t stay very long on the field,
can’t get good guidance from their home
church, and become very frustrated. Mission
agencies today are as professional as the
banking industry. Most churches don’t set
up their own bank, don’t even print their
own Bibles, so why should they think that
they are capable of sending their own mis-
sionaries without the help of a professional
mission agency?

Confusion and surprises, thus, will meet
those sent directly to the field from a local
church. They are unlikely to understand the
situation well enough to work as Paul did.
They may feel they have to pull people out of
their culture in order to save them when in
fact they need to save them within their cul-
ture so that God’s will may invade and
change that culture from the inside.

This leads to the next point: what indeed
needs to happen to whole societies?

Mission Four: The Mission of the
Kingdom

The A/Iission of the Local Church, page 6

The ”mission of the church” is to build
families, gather believers together to worship
and to challenge one another, to build build-
ings and plant other churches, and all that is
good. But down through history that has
often become the sum total of the church’s
mission. However, the mission of the church
is supposed to be the same as the mission of
]esus Christ: the mission of the Kingdom.
The mission of the Kingdom is bigger than
just getting more people saved and into the
Kingdom. The Kingdom of God is the Will of
God, and ]esus taught us to pray ”Your King-
dom Come, Your will be done on earth 
This means the citizens of the Kingdom have
some duties to do besides recruiting more
people for the Kingdom.

When the Great Commission says that we
are to ”disciple the nations” it is common for
people to think that ”discipling” means
teaching. They have the idea that missionar-

ies go around the world to teach people
about Christ.

However, that is only partly true. The

Great Commission ends up with a statement
that ]esus’ disciples are to teach people to
”obey” His commands. This is radically
more than for people to simply learn new
truths. It means they must yield their lives to
those truths. It means very clearly that they
are to ”do the will of God.”

This very same sentiment is described in
the Lord's prayer as we have already seen.
The Lord's prayer is a prayer that the King-
dom of God will come and God's will will be
done.

]esus opposed every evil, every corrup-
tion, every injustice, every disease. This
reveals the heart of His Father, and our
Father, in heaven. This essentially means
that the followers of Christ are shock troops
who are sent out into the world to purge
every evil, destroy every work of Satan, and
to do so in the Name of Christ.

This, of course, is what is already happen-
ing in many ways in a limited sense. It was a
Presbyterian woman who exposed the fraud
of the famous Enron Corporation. It was

missionaries who attacked the disease of lep-
rosy and discovered how to eradicate that
terrible disease. It is honest people who are
the salt and the light of this world. The great
strength of the American economy depends
on the very nearly invisible presence of mil-
lions of sincere believers.

Nevertheless, our formal Christian theol-
ogy is strangely silent on the things that the
Bible takes very seriously. 1 ]ohn 3:8 puts it
this way: ”The Son of God appeared for this
purpose, that He might destroy the works of
the Devil.” When all we do is gather people
out of the world and into church we are leav-
ing behind, not ﬁghting against, ”every evil,
every corruption, every injustice, every dis-
ease.” We are not fully representing ]esus or
the Father.

Every believer in ]esus Christ is called of
God, not just those who are going to be pas-
tors or missionaries. The call of God upon
every believer is to glorify Him. In Matthew
5 where ]esus said we are supposed to be the
salt of the earth, ]esus goes on to show how
that happens. He explains that we are to be a
shining light through our good deeds which
glorify our Father in heaven.

However, we live in the twenty—first cen-
tury not the first century. Believers today
have absolutely unprecedented access to
information about the past. It is tragically
unfortunate that what has happened since
Abraham is so little known and even less
understood. The gradual conquest of disease
and the consequent growth of population is
not understood as a measurement of the
expanding Kingdom of God. The meaning of
”good deeds” in the twenty—first century is
radically different from the first century.
]esus couldn't talk to people about germs
about which they knew nothing. He couldn't
expect poor rural people to pass new laws
that would change society, rule out slavery,
or oppose plural marriage.

Today, for example, a businessman who is
a believer in ]esus Christ must not falsely
advertise the virtues of his product. A sur-
geon who is a believer must not urge an oper-

The [Mission of the Local Church, page 7

ation which is really not essential. An attor-
ney must not bend the truth in order to win a
case. This is all to the good and if all believ-
ers were absolutely honest, absolutely loving,
this world would be radically different.

But the works of the devil require team-
work to defeat in many cases. There's no
way to rid the world of malaria by individu-
als being honest and loving to their neighbor.
Newer organizations must be created. New
mission structures must be designed. Believ-
ers must work collectively to correct some of
the major evils in this world, not just human
evil where human beings with evil intent
must be restrained, but natural evil where
deadly germs must be eradicated.

This may not sound like the usual message
of missions. But in fact the most successful
breakthroughs in the history of missions have
resulted from missionaries whose practical
love in a strategic fight against sickness and
disease has prepared the way for the Gospel —
just as ]esus did by actually demonstrating
the character of God. This is not merely a
humanitarian idea, it is an essential means of
glorifying God and drawing people to Him.
The Kingdom of God is not merely a huge
basket into which we throw as many souls as
we can helping them to escape this world.
Rather the Kingdom of God is the domain of
God's will working its way through all of
society even into the evil forces of nature

demonstrating the goodness and power of
God.

Conclusion

It is not as though the local church should
choose between Mission One, Mission Two,
Mission Three or Mission Four. All four of
these missions are essential. But it is true that
the first three are actually part of the fourth.
The overarching message of ]esus Christ is
”the Kingdom of God is at hand.” The King-
dom is here and has been growing in influ-
ence ever since Abraham was called to be a
blessing to the nations. As the Bible unfolds
that ”blessing to the nations” becomes in the
New Testament more clearly the expansion
of God's will in this world. In the New Testa-

ment we begin to see the active, intelligent
evil existence of Satan.

In the last two thousand years our under-
standing of the nature of Satan's works has
been increasingly clear. We now know much
more about the evils that tear down God's
glory and therefore the content of mission in
the twenty—first century is radically more
complex.

My prayer is that churches today will dis-
cover the increasing knowledge of the
wonder of God's creation and also the
increasing scope of Satan's evil doings.
When we worship we recognize God's won-
ders. When we leave the doors of the church
we work against Satan's monstrous evils.
Only in that way can we glorify God in all
the nations.

That is our mission.

The [Mission of the Local Church, page 8

The [Mission of the Local Church, page 9

