I.-.4-ta-.q‘s «...-,... .-

 

48 T:’:':.—.s

CRUCIAL MISSION ISSUES IN THE SEVENTIES

“Mission” is defined as propagating the Gospel and multiplying
ongoing churches in all ethne.

How secure correct emphasis on "eternal salvation” in the face of the
numerous “temporal salvations” so attractive to secular man?

How make sure that great campaigns of evangelism.transform “decisions
for Christ” into "responsible members of His Body“?

How proportion effort in mission, so that three—fourths of it does not
continue to be spent in good work whether the Church grows or not? How
proportion effort so that a suitable proportion is spent §9_that Christ is
known, loved and obeyed, His churches gg_multiply? (We assume that a suitable
proportion will be spent §o_that a more Christian social order arises.)

23
What principles should guide missions in the allocating of their
resources to — proclamation, church planting, relief of suffering,
social justice, and the perfecting of ongoing denominations?

When should a missionary society and its missionaries by—pass a Church
indifferent to great opportunities of discipling a new population,

and evangelize the new population directly? And-when should it confine
its efforts to reviving the indifferent Church?

As the Church proclaims the Gospel to the two billion who have not yet
believed, what irreducible essentials of the Christian faith must she
require? What Western cultural accretions and Eastern cultural accretions
can she announce as optional?

In View of great cultural diversity in the existing Churches, and the even
greater diversity in Churches yet to be born, what is the unity which marks
the Body? What are the inalienable marks of the Church?

In view of the rising tide of parochialism, American isolationism,
religious relativism and the clamor of the underprivileged ten percent
of American society, how can missions maintain a conscience concerning
the spread of the Gospel in the enormously receptive parts of the world
such as Latin America and Africa?

What is the best way to multiply darkskinned missionaries of the Gospel
today. How can Africasian denominations be encouraged to multiply
missions, to other than their own ethne and language units?

A.’

 

—-at

Crucial Mission Issues in the Seventies
Page 2

10.

ll.

l2.

13.

14.

15.

l6.

l7.

How can missionary candidates and career missionaries be trained to
be more effective channels of God's grace to men and women of other

languages, cultures, and economic levels? To be more effective church
multipliers?

Is “Church Growth” a sound principle in determining mission policy?
Are “great service of human need“ or "proclamation of the Gospel whether
men believe or not" sounder principles?

What biblical principles should guide missions in the seventies as they
determine what proportion of their resources should go to “work among”

the resistant and what to bringing the responsive to the obedience of
faith?

»What proportion of the mission budget should go to research in church

growth and the training of missionaries and national ministers in the
principles of church growth, the science of communication, and the
riches of sociological and anthropological insights into how churches grow?

How can cities be effectively evangelized? By which we mean seeded to
ongoing reproductive congregations? How avoid an increasing number of
missionaries shut up to "city work” which wins few to Christ and ministers
chiefly to sealed off, static congregations?

How train the real leaders of hundreds of thousands of small congregations
of the masses, so that they will know the Bible, become increasingly
faithful and skillful shepherds of the flock, and effective propagators

of the Gospel to the two billion?

In view of the protection now offered by medicine and nutrition, can
the missionaries of rich churches work out a standard of living which
is less of a stumbling block to poor non—Christians, and more of a
guiding light to Christians of rich nations as to how they should live?

Recognizing that God the Creator is continually at work both inside and
outside the Church and that the Holy Spirit inscribes a law in the hearts
of unbelieving Gentiles, to what extent should this lead Christian missions
to decrease Great Commission evangelism and increase cooperation with

men everywhere of all religions or of none in the achievements of good
goals?

How can Protestant theology, formed so largely in those centuries in
Europe when missionary passion was almost completely lacking, become
both more missionarily adequate and more biblically correct? God, for
example, is not only "the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth."
These eight words from the Apostles Creed do not reflect His passion
for the salvation of men to which the entire Bible bears witness and
for which the two billion plead. This doctrine should be upgraded in
light of both Scripture and global need. So should all doctrines.

.‘.

  

~. ...-....-~

..._>|

Crucial Mission Issues in the Se"enties
Page 3

18. In the seventies, how can Younger Churches use properly trained missionaries

more effectively in that further discipling of the nations so abundantly
possible?

19. How can radio team up with new churches recently established on new ground
so that sound churches may multiply with li
populations?
process?

ghtning speed through receptive
Need discipling any longer be a slow, partial, century—long

20. Where are the highly receptive segments of society likely to be found?
would it be desirable to chart them. How can an unhealthy rush of
ill-prepared and competitive missionaries to such populations be
prevented? How can receptive segments be best discipled?

21. What differences in mission policies are likely to be caused by the

tremendous possibilities of church growth in Africa, Latin America,
and parts of Asia?

22. What are the administrational changes needed to enable missionary
societies to disciple receptive populations in the seventies?

23. Should the Church consider short term missionaries the principal kind
and gradually phase out life—term missionaries?

24. Are missions in the seventies going to increase or decrease?

Should
young Christians go into missions as a life—work?

