ﬁeptember 25, 1965

Mr. Paul R. Orjals

Nazarene Theological Seminary
1700 East Meyer Boulevard
Kansas City, Missouri 6#13l

Dear Hr; Orjols:

Hon pleased I am to hear from Y%o'after these four years! I am
deliqhted to know of your many activities, particularly that you
are emphasizing the growth of the church in your missionary teach-
inc.

In regard to your kind invitation that I come to the Nazarene
Theological Seminary to give_four lectures in February or March,
1966, I possibly could; It would be very much easier to accept

if the four lectures could be one on_Monday night and three on
Tuesday. Is this possible? I carry a full teaching load here

and seldom. accept an invitation which takes me away from the
students who have gathered here from all over the world especially

for theme courses.

All good wishes and high regards.

Sincerely yours in Him,

.Dona1d McGavran

Dwzbok

NAZARENE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY

1700 East Meyer Boulevard
Kansas City, Missouri 64131

 

DEPARTMENT
HF MISSIONS

PAUL R. DRJALA January 5, 1966

Dr. Donald A. McGavran
Institute of Church Growth

Fuller Theological Seminary
134 North Oakland Avenue
Pasadena, California 91101

Dear Dr. McGavran:

Plans for your visit and lectures with us are going ahead as
indicated in my previous letters.

We made a preliminary announcement of this at the November
meeting of the Kansas City Theological Society, and we want to
send a final letter of announcement and invitation again to the
seminaries and pastors at the end of this month.

I have the title of your address for the Tuesday evening inter-
seminary meeting (“The Tension Between Evangelization and Discipling
in Christian Mission Today"). Could you send me the general topic
of your four morning lectures and/or individual topics so that we
can use this inapromotion?

If you wish, we can.send you a check for the amount of your air

fare in advance, or take care of that when you get here. Just let

me know your preference. Also we will plan to meet you at the airport
when we know of your'reservations, and we shall make hotel reservations

for your stay here. If there is anything else we can do to facilitate
your visit with us, please do not hesitate to contact me.

Si.ncere1y ,
\ . .“ . \
 \ 51,/€ (X2

aul R. Orjala

Graduate School of Theology for the Church of the Nazarene

NAZARENE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY

1700 East AAeyer Boulevard
Kansas CHy,lABsouH 6413]

V’ }‘V'*’’ «
$7’ ‘>“ s““>/27 A“'/»‘t’/W

01 {off} if ,1-3“ ‘T  9 . ‘
DEPARTMENT NW4’ “M 1 J1 9’
nF MISSIONS J 3'  //igii/‘V 

I w
PAuLR.ummLA (Q5 A }/p o y” ¢ [1 d January 19’ 1966

 

$5 . 39 -”

\
Dr. Donald Mcgavranq “(Q NM
Fuller Theological Seminary
l35 North Oakland Avenue
Pasadena, California 91101

Ibar Dr. McGaVran:

Thank you for the titles of your lectures. We shall plan to meet
you on Monday, February 14, when you arrive on TWA Flight 96.

There is just one thing I would like word from you on. I think in

my previous correspondence I indicated that we usually have a Wednesday
noon luncheon open to pastors and visitors, as well as for faculty and
students, after which we open the floor for questions to the visiting
lecturer. It may be that you will need to catch the 2:00 p.m. plane 0«rL/\‘3‘”°
in order to return in time to your duties——in which case we will just
forget about the luncheon and question hour. I have checked with the
airlines and discovered that the next flight does not leave until

7:05 p.m., arriving in L. A. at 8:05 (by Continental), which would

mean a considerably longer delay here. It may be that having the
Tuesday evening address would also_give opportunity for questions
afterward which could substitute for the Wednesday noon hour.

we are already keeping you-quite busy, and we do not want to impose

on you further. However, if you have the time to spare and are
interested in the Wednesday noon luncheon and question hour, we will
schedule that ahdl get a letter out for reservations. we plan to send

our final letter of announcement about February 1.

We are certainly looking forward to your coming. Our recent denominational
conference on evangelism (here in Kansas City last week) has pavedihe way
for increased interest, and I am sure that faculty, students, and visitors
alike will be ready for your message. Our prayers are with you as you come.

ince»ely,

 ée

Graduate School of Theology for the Church of the Nazarene

  

NAZARENE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY

1700 East Meyer Boulevard
Kansas Ci’ry, Missouri 6413]

 

DEPARTMENT

or MISSIONS
PAUL R. DRJALA February 2, 1966

is
Dr .. Donald McGavr-an M W

Fiﬂler Theological Seminary

l35 North Oakland Avenue W N
Pasadena, California 91101

Dear Dr . M:Gavran:

We received your letter and are planning the events accordingly,
with the Tuesday evening lecture (With some time for questions)
replacing the Wednesday noon luncheon session.

Letters have gone out to the pastors, seminaries. ministerial
association representatives; and we hope to get a good write—up
in the Kansas City Star. We are trusting and praying for a
very profitable time with you here.
/'-ea’
we'll meet your plane Monday the l1+th,‘ at §:lIrO p.m. on TWA 96.

£;>’ncerely,   F  

  

Grcncluate School of Theology for the Church of the Nazarene

iss§s
T\\\\K\'“?

NAZARENE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY

1700 East Meyer Boulevard
./ i Kansas City, Missouri 64131

\x\

 

DEPARTMENT
UF MISSIUNS
PAUL R. DRJALA February 9. 1966

' School of World Mission
Fuller Theological Seminary
135 North Oakland Avenue
135 North Oakland Avenue
Pasadena, California 91101

Dear Sirs:

Please send me a copy of Dr. McGavran's 1955 address on, "The
Discipling of Africa in This Generation," as mentioned in the
January CHURCH GROWTH BULLETIN.

would you please also send a copy to our denomination secretary

of world missions, Dr. E. 8. Phillips, 6401 The Paseo, Kansas City,
Mo. 64131.

Thank you for your kind attention.

C
Q. we
- Paul R. Orjala

Gracluate School of Theology foo‘ the Church of the Nazaxrene

B.

NAZARENE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY

1700 East Akeyer Boulevard
Kansas City, Missouri 64131

 

DEPARTMENT

or Mmsmus
PAUL R. URJALA September 21’ 1965

Dr. Donald McGavran

Institute of Church Growth
Fuller Theological Seminary

135 North Oakland Avenue
Pasadena, California 9ll0l

Dear Dr. McGavran:

I met you at the Sumer Institute of Linguistics at Norman, Oklahoma,
in l96l. I spent fourteen years as a missionary of the Church of the
Nazarene in Haiti, and I am hoping to finish my Ph. D- through the
Hartford Seminary Foundation this year or next. Last year I returned
from Haiti permanently to head.up the department of missions at our
seminary, so this is the beginning of my second year of teaching here.

The teaching process has been very gratifying, as I have had some
excellent students. Last year I taught linguistics. anthropology,
mission theory; practice of missions, adult literacy, journalism.

This year I am adding a seminar in church growth, which incidently
receives heavy emphasis in my other missions courses.

In addition, I direct for our denomination each summer a week's

workshop for furloughing missionaries and a two—week orientation L,’
institute for out—g©ing missionaries. we put heavy emphasis on LJDJ"
the church growth viewpoint in both of these, using How cnuaomns Q, ~ 1' ,
GROW as a springboard of discussion. I am thrilled with the content \. ,gtLi
and spirit of CHURCH GROWTH AND CHRISTIAN MISSION. m;/7

to our seminary for lectures, this year or any time? Our full days fo 1.
Jclasses are Tuesday through Friday. The normal lecture schedule would 5 4&7”?
‘be four lectures given in two days. This could be any two days when we “V _}’
have full classes. I am looking for a lecturer for February or March 4%’,
1966, but we would be interested in the following year or two if you ‘6
could arrange it. We have a $200.00 honorarium available for this,
and we would take care of your air fare and entertainment here in
addition. Please let me know if there is any possibility this year
or any time in the next two years.

Y: V.
\ Q/aw
1.. Orjala

Graduate ool of Th ology for the Church of the Nazarene

J

‘U

Now, to the point. Is there any possibility that you could come here ﬂ%JO -
A

X44/W 9.7
NAZARENE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY

_1700 Eosf Aﬂeyer Boulevard
Kcinsos Cify, Missouri 64131

 

DEPARTMENT

or MISSIONS
PAuLR.ommLA February 24, 1966

Dr. Donald McGavran

School of Missions

Fuller Theological Seminary
Pasadena, California

Dear Dr. McGavran:

Your visit and lectures at our seminary have proven to be most
stimulating. I've had a constant stream of students coming in

for conferences as part of the result. I can't say how much we
appreciate your taking time from your busy schedule to “come over
into Macedonia and help us”. For one thing, I think the faculty
now understands a little more about what I am trying to do. We
have had a number of stimulating discussions at lunch and elsewhere.

I do intend to get some writing done, and I shall try to get the

requested 900—word article to you for the Church Growth Bulletin.

I have appreciate the notes and articles in there so much, and I
guess it would be selfishgfor me not to share some of the experiences
the Lord has given me when they might help someone else.

6pV' I would greatly appreciate it if you would have the following two
9” items sent to me:
Q r 1) "How to Make a Church Growth Survey”

W /),,,2ﬂS\A 2) "Bridge into Mexico"

Would it be too much to ask for two copies each of these?

 
 

Again, thank you so much. We shall be looking forward to seeing
you again this June in Pasadena, if possible. Blessings on you.

1-
d‘$é//V

S

   

Graduate School of Theology for the Church of the Nazarene

TWENTIETH CENTURY MISSIONARY STRATEGY

What Is The Strategy Demanded by the remain three decades in the 20th century?
Almost we need a strategy for the 21st Century....
Four Main Elements of This Strategy
I. We need theological certainty that a prereguisite to all advance is
multiplication of churches.
A. Component parts of church multiplication
l.Proc1amation of Jesus Christ as divine and only Saviour
2. Persuading men to become His disciples
3. Integrating them into living churches(built according to)anxx
4. Tﬁhindefinitely reproduceable pattern, ~ ' 'Ia.cw .s.
B. The certainty must be theological. Church multiplication must be what God desires.
‘Many of my fellow ministers in America turn from evangelism and ‘-
church multiplication because this brings to their mind immediately
denominational rivalry and "We Methodists must not fall behind in the
" race. we must not let the Southern Baptists get ahea
This is to miss the real issue:As obedient servants of God what must we do?
In View of the 2 billion who do not know of Christ at all, what does
God our Saviour mamm command us?
Strategy in the 20th century must go forward believing that mha fantastic
multiplication of churches is God's wil for today.

     

50’ 101-1 ‘O ZQQI. 'II‘.l"

II. Today's Strategy Must See the Mosaic with its Responsive and Resistant Pieces.

A. The population of the world not a homogeneous whole

The population of the world made

up of hundreds, thousands, hundreds of thousands
of separate pieces gon»Iwt "«

~ .... The Eta in Japan.
The Samurai in Japan of 1880.

   

The Turks in Germany

The Italians in Brazil

The Japanese in Brazil

The 131 tribes in Central Nigeria

B. Some pieces of the mosaic are xxxpnnxixzxx resistant

0. Some piecesin are responsive: Braceros ih USA

D. Today's Strategy Must Go to the Responsive First as of the highest
theological priority — believing that when God has ripened a people,
He Himself intends that we should reap them first

1_: 

$ 

 

JIII. Massive Research in Church Growth

IV,

A,What Industry spends.......
What Educagion spends........
Wht the Post Office Spends.....

What Christian Msssion Spends......

B. The Tremendous Experience of the Church in Church Growth.....
~'3*i It has grown
It is growing
C. But Locked up in Denominational, Geogrphical, and Linguistic pockets.
The fact

The block to ready circulation of church growth books......

Send church rowth books to your missionaries
read them yourselves
discover all that is known about church growth
provide subsidy for church growth books

finance your missionary friend through a year‘s special study of c.g.

Hard Bold Plans to Multiply Churches

fuzzy mission work

generalized mission work
splendid mission work

good kindly aimless mission work

The greatest enemy of Christian Mission is

Ask yourself: how will this mission
activity lead to the establishment of more churches...
An uncomfortable question
A revolutionary question
It will lead amgmmd many missionaries to Gethsemane.

Study other denominations to see what they are doing which plants churches
copy them

The Latin American Church Growth Study
Presbyterians in Tabasco....Assemblies in El Salvador
Congregacao Cristan in St Paulo....Methodist Pentecostals in Chile
Baptists in Rio de Janeiro.....A:47/view» ha /7v“-/Q
’ Dwgyﬂénf C.’»// r- ran/r
Do not worship yourp1an...Use it
If it does not deliver church growth throw it away.
Nevius: winter schol, he paid the way back, fed, and
housed them.
You men and women on the way to the field.....look for what plants churches
Ebu ministers and supporters from the homeland....let your missionaries know
that you want them to be using hard bold plans to plant churhhes
Let us all pxzxxikxi read the New Testament to see its hard bold plans
Let us pray that God may use us - use us uprentirely - in clear definite
plans for discipling the nations in this cgg£g§guh~

_4n-.._..nr»

\‘:/V ‘ab 4% 43¢

(/“’ .”(\  
. S71 .3
Dr. ﬁnal R. Orjela . MW Ky?’ n’
Nazarene Theological Seminary -
1700 Bent Meyer Boulevard

Kansas City, Missouri 6#l31
Dear Dr. Orjalaz

Thank you for your letter of October 18. The program which
you sot up in your third peragreph is excellent.

Tho intor~seminary evening Tuesday night is also quite agree-
able to me. My one suggestion is that instead of mmzing it
purely an informal meeting, we plan for an address followed
by informal discussion and an opportunity to meet and talk
with friends from other seminaries. .The topic that I had

in mind for such an address would be — let us say - "The
Tension Between Evangelization and Discipling in Christian
Mission Today." Alternatively we could leave the subject

of that evening open until nearer the time.

Every good wish to you.

Sincerely yours in Him,

Donald Mcﬁavrah

ﬁ:bak

 

NAZARENE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY

1700 East Aﬂeyer Boulevard
Kansas City, Missouri 64131

DEPARTMENT
UF MISSIONS

PAUL R. DRJALA

October 18, 1965

Dr . Donald McGavran

Institute of Church Growth
Fuller Theological Seminary
135 North Oakland Avenue

Pasadena, California 91101
Dear Dr. McGavran:

February 15 and 16 will work out best for us, so we will plan on this
and get preliminary announcements out to the other seminaries and
interested groups. I'll check to be sure, but I believe your lectures

will also be aired on our seminary FM radio station unless you prefer

Gracluat

that they not be. We usually broadcast our special lecture series.

Thank you for having bibliographic material and 3. out sent to us.

If we follow our usual special lecture schedule, the first lecture

will be Tuesday morning at 9:95 with the second lecture at about ll:45. aw]
You will have approximately 45 minutes for each lecture, but this is {:g£,»”
flexible and we do not want our speakers to feel bound by this. (when

I gave the missions lectures in l96l, some of them were over an hour!

and some of the faculty and students stayed around for another l5 minutes
-of questions.) The two lectures the second day will be at the- same times;

we would like tolhave a luncheon open to students and faculty, probably ‘LIV:
Wednesday, with a question time afterward. You would be free then to u ﬁ,:I‘""{ V;
travel immediately after this. I believe there is a good jet connecti 1"" J-})U‘ H
a little later in the afternoon which will get you back to L. A. about/t’:V"‘<3w«9*""
dinner time. 1 d/\
cw a«1'.“;7 
If we can arrange for a special inter—seminary evening Tuesday night, {rof'(”“'"k _
more or less informal and probably in our lounge, would you like to do }-n{;W,..uf
something like this? I don't want to work you to death, but we do wan /( ‘,;t.~1rv-'
to take advantage of what will be a very special privilege for us here C ‘-(of.

in Kansas City. Feel free to say no, and give us any suggestions that

may occur to you.

;.i2@ :a

Paul R. Orgala
e School of Theology foo-

oirce

     

the Chtwch of the Nazarene

October 13, 1965

Dr. Paul R. Orjala

Nazarene Theological Seminary
1700 East Meyer Boulevard
Kansas City, Missouri 64131

Dear Dr. Orjalat

I have just been looking over your
and October 11, and in view of the
that St. Paul's Methodist, Central Baptist, and Midwest
Baptist may well cooperate in this series of lectures, I
think I had better reverse myself and choose a date in the
middle of the week. So I am suggesting that February 15
land 16 or 8 and 9 would be the best time for me.

letters of September 21
fact that you anticipate

 

 

I am asking the Public Relations Department of the seminary
to send you biographical material and a cut that you may
like to use. ‘ i '

I am pleased at the prospect of meeting you and being at

the Nazarene Theological Seminary. One of your missionaries
to Japan is taking work at the School of World Mission this
fall, and I trust that we shall have many further contacts
through the years. '

Sincerely yours in His obedience,

Donald McGavran

DM zbak

 

 

NAZARENE THEOLOGlCAL SEWINARY

1700 East AAeyer Bouievard
Kansas City, Missouri 64131

 

DEPARTMENT
IJF MISSIEINS
PAUL R. IJRJALA

October 11, 1965

Dr. Donald McGavran
Institute of Church Growth
Fuller Theological Seminary
l35 North Oakland Avenue
Pasadena, California 91101

Dear Dr. MbGavran:

we are delighted that there is a possibility that you can come to
our seminary for lectures next February or March.

After consulting with Dr. L. T. Corlett, our president, may I make

the following suggestions to help you in selecting the dates. We

would prefer having the lectures in some two—day combination from

Tuesday to Friday. However, if it is a choice of coming or not, we certainly
want you to come as you suggested for a lecture Monday night and three
lectures on Tuesday. The reason for avoiding the night lectures is that

some students work nights, and I would.like you to have a maximum

hearing in our student body.

There are two weeks in February and March when we cannot have the
lectures. They are Eebruary 21-25 and March l4—l8. Otherwise you

may choose at your convenience.

As soon as we hear from you we will get it into our calendar and send
preliminary announcements to the three other seminaries in town, as I
am sure they will want to'participate (St. Paul's Methodist, Central E?‘
Baptist, and Midwest Baptist).

- ‘-ly,
‘ Q
Paﬁ j&a K‘  J

Graduate School of Theology for the Church of the Nazarene

