EUGENE REGISTER-GUARD, Sat.,"Oc_t. 17, 1954 -page as 3

 

interest in Growth Rising A’

Rising interest in ch urc h week that “there is a rising in- which will be published -by Har-
‘growth on the part of the more terest in the growth of the per and Row. - '
than 200 boards of missions church. I think we‘re beginning McGavran feels the publica-
in the United States is report- to see some effect.” tions are “reaching a leadership
ed by Donald 1\’IcGaV1‘aI1. diI‘0°' For nearly. four years, the in practically all the Protestant
tor of the Institute of Church 1CG...affiliated with Northwest missionary societies.”

Growth (ICG); In EU8e“e- Christian C olle g e but non. He feels that missionary pro-
MeGavran, himself a retired denominational in work—has gY3mS today have problems. -
missionary in India, said this been conducting a program (if "There ﬁfe J'USi 50 Xminy 300d
academic study and research things to £10," he noted. "Mis-
for missionaries, in order to im- Sionaries today .  are not 5136-
prove their effectiveness in for- Clalisls in the growth Of the
eign mission work, church,” which he feels should

More than 55 students, who he the mam emphasis °f hhs‘
worked in 25 foreign countries swhary programs‘,
with 19 missionary societies, M°GaVrah believes that
havc studied at the institute. ih.ere.am a numheh °f 5990131‘
, This fal1’s class of‘ 16 students ‘he? 1“ the ,hh55‘°h ﬁe1d'—°‘h1'
includes missionaries of.numer- cahohv medlcmet ht°17a°Y—bl1i’-
ous denominational ‘affiliations that mahy °[ the mis-h°“31'i95
from various parts of the world. are Th“? focused” 0“ church ex-
But the institute’s work ex- tehswh’ church growth-

tends b yond ﬁh 155 . In extension of religions
Each 10%, Smdenf p‘§..:pa:‘;‘S’ma throughout the world, Christian-

report on church growth in the hy is “falling hehihd in i the

area.of the world where he has race", .M°GhVmh h°heVe5-
Served If the church is going to “be

A number of these, reports, °hj°°,t,iV_‘_"”.3hd ffahhfhl to its
some book-length, have been Lord}; .1t 15 30mg. to have,”
published. And this September,  35*“ achurchﬁsroivthi which
the institute published issue 9 Wm“ “fps 3 measuhe Of
No. 1 of “Church Growth Bul- fa‘h‘.h‘h“e§5-. . -
letin,” a bimonthly publication “W1 “H5 1“ mind» M¢GaVI‘an

- ~ h h th and his staff are working to
::.1::1g‘sa::1£1ieEVS.urc grow "develop and study church

McGavran, who's serving as g"°“’th h‘ the churches 0f the
e‘m0r'°f this’ worked out a-I._ world, to find techniques and

rangements for publication with Policies which have heeh Shh’
Overseas Crusades, a missionary cessfhh

6 ~th h d t . ~ At present a study of church
Xégtighzigitofvlcalifhasgggégéoig growth in the Solomon Islands

1 ‘ in the South Pacific is being
algfe tlgegrgeeirx. in February is conducted by the Rev. Alan

McGavran's next book, "Church ‘:“—“-“‘
Growth and Christian Mission,”

Director of institute in Eugene Says " -i «

 

Tippett, professor of anthropol-
93y and church growth at the
institute. .

For this project,‘ Tippett is
“on loan” from the institute to
the Division of Missionary
Studies of the World Council
of Churches, and will return to
-Eugene next September.

‘Originally f 1‘ 0 In Australia,
Tippett served as a Methodist
missionary for 25 years in the
South Pacific. —

Response to the work'o£ the
young" institute from denomi-
nation headquarters, mission
societies and missionaries, and
“a respect there’ wasn't three
Years ago,” is surprising to Mc-
Gavran. , ,

“1t’s extraordinary," he said,
“Here we are ‘buried’ on the
West Coast.‘There is an ac-
ceptance."

And through the work of the
institute, McGavran hopes ‘to
build this respect and accept;
ance of the ICG into a program
to which denominations and
mission boards turn for author.
itative advice.

  
 
   
   
  
 
    
   
  
  
  
   
    
 
   
   
   
   
       
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
      
     
     
  
 
   

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
    
  
   
  
 
 
 
    
  
  

 

  
  
  
    
  
   
   

Discussion ’
Series Set
.On Campus

A series of four discussion
. programs on current religious
-topics will continue this week
on the University oi Oregon
campus.

The programs, sponsored by
. the Religious Directors Assn.,
an organization of campus
workers with student groups,
are open to the public for a
fee of $1 per discussion series.

Slated for ‘Tuesday nights
are discussions on “The Chris-
tian-Jewish Dialogue,” led by
Rabbi Louis Neimand of Tem-
-plc Beth Israel, at 6:30 p.m.,
and “Liturgy and Worship-—-His-
tory and Modern Setting," led
by the Rev. Ken Weig of Luth-
. er House, at 8:15 p.m.

Thursdays, a session on “Re-
ligion and Social Action” led by
the Rev. Robert Kingsbury of
Wesley Foundation is slated for
6:30 p.m., and “Science and the
Humanities” is scheduled for
8:15 p.m., with the Rev. Bruno
Gibson of Newman Center as

December 27 , 1960

Dr". John B. Snook, Editor
Union Seminary Quarterly Review
30141 Broadway

New York 27, Bew‘Yor1c,_

Dear Dr . Snookg

The International Review of Missions has just given first. place in ‘
its book review section to a review written by Canon H. A. 0. Warren;
General Secretary of the great Church Missionary Society of the _
Anglican Church. I presume both because of the place assigned and
the eminsnt~ writer of the review that the International Review of
Missions considers this book to be of first importance.

The author of the book reviewed is an alumnus of Union Theological
Seminary, 1930-32. His doctorate is from Columbia University in
collaboration with Union. He has also been awarded the Doctor of
Divinity degree by Butler University and the Doctor of Letters by
Phillips University. He is now Director of the Institute of Church
Growth at Northwest Christian College, being loaned to us by The «
United Christian lﬁssionary Society. The one to whom I refer is Donald
A. HcGavran. '

The book which is receiving such favorable attention is ;@ Churches
Grow - _T31o; gag Frontiengg Mission. It is not a book on evangelism
But an arrestingphilosophv of mission. It is being read around the
world by leaders of marnfdenominations. It is published simultaneously
in England and America. ' ‘
when you have it reviewed in your esteemed Union Seminary Quarterly
Review, it will be appreciated if you will assign the reviewing to
someone who will read it for what it is - a thoughtful, searching
criticism of some‘ very widespread recent trends in mission and a con-
structive proposal to remedy adverse conditions. (Because one of Dr.
HcGavran's precedirg books, _§'__h_e_ Bridges g_§_ C_}_o_d_, so captured the
attention of missionary thinkers that they are now apt to assume he

is writing about tribal movements to Christ. Haw Churches Grow" is not

' about "people movements." It is a trenchant criticism of missions as

they are now being carried out.)
We shall also appreciate it if you will publish a news note about the

beginning of The Institute of Church Growth here at Northwest Christian ‘

College. Your courtesies will be deeply appreciated.

Sincerely yours,

Ross J. Griffeth
President

“'~.:s
ax ‘

E633’). onlsrsrn, 3.0., Ph.D., Preaident
WELLIAM T. same, B.D.,M.A., Deon -.
comma A. McGAVRAN, no. mo. Dircdor
The Institute of Church Growih

"Put an the Whole Armor of God-— Go Yc into All the Warld— Preach the Ward"

 

NORTHWEST CHRISTIAN COLLEGE
952: ﬂrzatitute Of  gmowt/z’

ELEVENTH AND ALDER EUGENE, OREGON PHONE D1 3-I64!

 

John B Snook,

The Editor, Dec 21st 1960
Union Seminary Quarterly Review,

30hl Broadway New York 27 N.Y.

Dear Dr Snook:

The International Review of Missions has just given first
place in its book review section to one by Canon M A 0 Warren,
General Secretary of the great Church Missionary Society of the
Anglican Church. I presume both by the place assigned and the
eminent writer of the review, the International Review of Missions
considers that the book is of first importance.

-The author is an alumnus of Union Theological Seminary in
1930-32. His doctorate is from Columbia University‘ in collaboration
with Union. He also is doctor of divinity and doctor of
letters - from Butler University and Phillips University respectively.
He is now the director of the Institute of Church Growth at
Northwest Christian College,being loaned to us by the United Christian
Missionary Society. His name is Donald McGavran.

The book receiving such favorable attention is
HOW CHURCHES GROv%THE NEW FRONTIER OF MISSION. It is not
a book on evangelism, but an arresting philosphy of mission. It is
being read all over the world by leaders of many different
denominations. It is published in England and America simultaneously.

when you have it reviewed in your esteemed Union Seminary

Quarterly Review couid.you please assign it to someone who will read
it for what it is — a thoughtful searching criticism. of some very
wide—spread recent trends in mission and a constructive proposal to
remedy the situation? (One of Dr Mc”avran's preoeeding books — The
Bridges of God — so captured the attention of missionary thinkers, that
they assume he is writing about tribal movements to Christ. I can
assure you that this is not about people movements. It is a trenchant
criticism of missions as they are carried out today.

Will you also kindly carry a news note about the beginning
of the Institute of Church Growth here at Northwest Christian College -
possibly as news from alumni?

with all good wishes,

5 inc erely,

.zr“

November 7th 1960

Canon 1-1 .4; C warren,

c/o Edinburgh House,

2 Baton Gate, London, :3 E! 1
Emgland.

Dear Canon warren:

I have just finiaizod reading; your thoughtful sensitive r-sview of
:10‘.-J CHURCEES C5153.-i 21:1 the October issue of the IR}: and write you in the -A
first flush of my enjoyment and appreciation.

It is an undo:-stzmding review. You have read the book coroflllly, uiiich
in a person of your enormous :Lnterests'an:3 bu.rdon:3 is in itself a tribute I

a;.2prec;'aato .

Then you agree tiiolb the situation to *.«:‘n:i.ch I write is one 01‘ great

gravity. Mission 131151’; not be dofixlod as “aid in perpetuity to stc1p1‘;c:cl Churches".

Did you notice that Din Royal writes in -the s::.m:=. 135119 of the Iii}-S an article
called "Do:E‘oatist Protestantism and Open Doors in India". He sees the some

serious condition. I hope my little boryk may be one more voice carllz‘-ng

attention to the fact that "pro-occupation zrith ploughing re:;uloz'1;x by-;':a9ses
opportunities to reap riyo harvests" - ‘.:hetho:' those he of ten men — or ten thousand.
I see the phenomenon so vividly and often wonder ‘I‘!!gt§'l0? I am unbalanced in
regard to it. Your rcviot: reassures me - others also are oe»:::L:;{.; it.

Of course you disagree with some of my positions - but in such a fair
and 1.-.-inclly way! To sozz-3 extent I agree with your reoervot2’.ons. lo I point out
on page 13 I have cotzsoiously over ezrzphesizezi clm:.~c!: grcxrth err}, while hoping
that this over emphasis will not be needed tomorrow, rrazlntaxir. that it :L_a today,

As you so well say, after all disorgroonzents the c-er.-"t:-vJ. qrv.est:.'aou remains:
"Are m in our mi3sion:1:7,r thiz~.1:i:z{-'. gco.re<’. to aholziinz action, or are we oing out
to those who do not Euox: Uhriot and =.-rinwin‘ th 1:: for Iizixn? " Yes, that question
remains. 3;‘; smszrera arc: the host I kno-.3- I write the truth 0.8 I see it. I earnestly
hope that others, aszldrsesing tltoxaoelves to the question, will give truer and better
ans'.:. :3. Your review 53'-.ou1d stimitutc some to ma.’u:c the attempt.

This is really the basic reason uh;-,r we are starting: the Institute oi‘ Church
Growth and giving x-cse::ch fellot-zsizips to men of all zienomlnotions - so that we
shall begin gott‘;.:1_r; ::=.am; diiferimt considered an-3-.-zero, each in the light of his own
deno.. urzticml bac1"*~'<>und and his cum particular population.

nu.-

I keep hopzmg that the boards will make 3 joint effort of considerable magnitude
(perhaps one per cent oi‘ total :ce-ceipts) to search out the ans:-Jar.-7:.

Thank you very much indeed for the review. After the privilege 01‘ hearing your
;ex-1.e1oy lectures and having you and Mrs ‘warren in our home, this review is
specially appreciated. Go". bless and use you mightily.

1-lost cordially yours,
Donald I~IcGavr-an

"'~'-‘_,,‘E§5kj9‘.'-‘.!W4rZ)h$'HF‘°=‘;':r:w~ -

 

CHIT—CHAT - NOVEMBER, 1960
HOW CHURCHES GROW

“Boards of missions spend millions to plant churches abroad," says Dr. Donald McGav—
ran, "but their efforts are often retarded by two erroneous assumptions: (a) that
maintaining missionaries on the field is the best way to achieve that end; (b) that
training in an American.seminary plus special orientation in the revolutionary change
in missions today fits churchmen to achieve church growth." Dr. McGavran then points
out as a result of a wide study of church growth that "little correlation exists be»
tween the number of missionaries and the multiplication of churches." He also de~
clares that “the type of training mentioned in (b) almost never deals seriously and
systematically with church growth on the field.”

So Donald A. Mcﬁavran wrote another book. It is entitled How Churches Grow,is pub-
lished by World Dominion Press, costs $l.h5, may be ordered from this office, and is
of utmost importance to those engaged in.evangelism and church planting. This book
is divided into five parts. First there is an estimate of the present opportunity
which confronts Christian missions in.the world and an analysis of some of the reasons
why the opportunity is not being recognized. Second comes a most valuable section on
the need to distinguish, within any population, between those most likely to be imme-
diately responsive to the gospel and those who for various reasons are_unre§ponsive,,
;;_i,a.:~concentrating on the former, without 6verlooking’alt6gether the latter§' Thira"bomé§”
that which the reviewer in the October, l960, issue of "The International Review of
Missions” calls the "most provocative" section of the book, containing such chapter
titles as “Authentic Spiritual Fire," "The Prison of Patterns,” and “Permanent Versus
Pauline Involvement.“ Fourth come some altogether stimulating chapers, sparkling
with case histories from around the world: "Methods which Multiply Churches," "The
Creation and Support of Leadership,” and "Checking Methods Against Actual Growth.”
He writes, "Estimation of results is a reasonable Christian procedure and must be
made. It is also a delicate one. It involves spiritual values which cannot be
counted, as well as Christians who can be. Simply counting heads, for example, is
not sufficient; neither is simply not.counting them. Paul's epistles have a value
far beyond the numbers of Christians and churches he brought into existence; yet they
would neither have been written or transmitted if his labors had not produced count-
able Christians and countable churches....Qualify and understand it as we may, to
check our aims against our achievement is most necessary." (p. 1&7) Finally comes
a valuable discussion of the place of administration and organization in church growﬁr
On every level: the mission society, field conference, and even station administra-
tion, each is responsible for achieving church growth. "Can the quarter—back or cap—
tain advance the ball down the field? We answer, that is his principal function. He
administers the team so that the ball advances, yards are gained, and points scored.
Facing a given formation, he may send the play left, right, forward, or even.backward,
but the intent will be to gain yards. He knows that his success is not going to be
measured by the ski1l_with which he—keeps the team moving,ithesprecision of his-plays~.r_n e
or the good—will of his players. It is going to be measured by touch-downs and field
goals.“ (p. 181) The above reviewer acknowledges that readers will be thoroughly
. disturbed and even exasperated by statements and arguments in this book. Neverthelee
Dr. McGavran is sure that an enterprise which spends hundres of millions of dollars a
year should face realistically how it is getting. on with its central task: church
growth. '

Not contenting himself with writing a book, Dr. McGavran has opened a training center
at Northwest Christian College, Eugene, Oregon, called "The Institute of Church
Growth." Here careful study is made of the many types of church growth found, the
complex processes by which churches grow and the many preventable causes of non-
growth. Missionaries particularly concerned may get three months, six months, or nine
months of specialized training in how churches grow in the particular population
among which these persons work.

The book How Churches Grow and the lnstitute of Church Growth both exist to make
missionaries more productive in winning men to Christ and persuading them to become

His disciples and responsible members of His church. This is also our primary
concern. " EDWIN E. JACQUES

