o 

Record of the March 222 1956 Meeting of the Nlsslons Port Cogmittggu Geneva Room,
Fuller Seminary.

fgesontz Drs. Recs, Hubbard, Engstrom, ﬁceavran, Messrs. Holcomb, Gill, Dayton,
Bennett, Smoker, Lundqulst.

lho Comittee.assomblod at noon and continued in session till after 3:00 p.o.
d
I. A wide ranging discussion covergag many aspects of "disciplined planning," and
the production of a Port Chart on the Evengglisatlon of tho Uorld for the Berlin

-conference. Topics such as the fol}owln§“€onsidered.

our task is many times bigger than the multi~million construction at Saigon

who will be at Berlin and he wlll_they react to Port?

Ho.§an we present the plan in such a way as to overcome {he built in
resistonéa to whatever appears tousobstitute for the Holy ﬁpirit or to
mochanizo missions thus making the Holy Spirit unnocessarj?

All we aﬁe really doing L3 to present the events which must take place before
the evangélization of the world can take place.

We must be clear that we count heavily on the churches o? Afericasia as .

a major factor in world evangelization. The witness of new Christians,
oil Chklstians, the laltv of Eurica and.Afericasia fooussod on pe?Suadlng
mon to become disciples of Christ and responsible mohpers of His
churches, is most important;

Perhaps our major contribution is to project a large enough View of the task
of missions to demand-the use of How Tools.

we must depend heavily on heuristics « a form of planning which creates further
ﬁlennlng. T

On; “Hiscipilned Planning” will define the problem and prove‘ it can be

sqived- But it must be oloar that the motivation vemélns uﬁchanged.
THat.is Calvary. out job is to show how the missionoFy mandate of our
Lord can be better jﬁplemented with todoy‘s new toolo»'

Keep clear that PERT is Qgpilizatlgg, not motivation;

Part of our job is to show how; cultural, linguistic, religious, economic,
fesistences can be diminished or eliminated.

Quantification of the problem brings great dangers of oﬁionoing those at
Berlin who see this for-the first time » particularly those who are not
Kmorioags ~ Europeans, lndians, etc. _

Ha would_be'%ariously remiss if we failed to exploro this new technique of
disciplined planning and use it as far as we can. ,The Holy Spirit
is the Spirit of Order. He oan use all new technlduos. no dlrected.Raui
ﬁo use Greek, Roman cttiienship, sailing vessels, and the philosophy of
his times. He directs us to use these new techniques of our times.

Can mo enlist those who are going to be at Berlin in reading books about
Disciplined Planning? Con wo tell them what wo ave doing and ask their
old so that the Part Chart will be someting on which gggx have worked?

Let us guoss what will happen after we present this at Boﬁlin? Remember
opposition will be emotional, hot and strong. On tho_contrary, might it
not be that within ten or five years all missionary societies would
be constructing Part Charts of tholr.misslon enterprises?

in all our thinking we must remember that REViVAL is most necessary event
which should take place ouorywhere.

Proverbs I629 "A man's mind plans hlsiway, but the Lord directs his steps."
This might become our banner and chief slogan.

