l_\

SUNSET OR SUNRISE?

A collection of contemporary lectures on

world mission strategy by eight outstanding
scholars from the Faculty of The School of
World Mission, FULLER THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY

Edited by Hugh Steven

Page nine

Then what later proved to be one of the most

’decisiVe battles in history, Charles the Hammer in

22g; (date) stopped the Moslems western advance
at the battle of Tours.
The Christian community was happy with the

Victory at Tours but had no concept of its far

reaching effects. Mbst thought only a little

breathing space had been gained. The pessimists

of the day could very well believe they were standing
in the sunset of tﬁk-Christian missiont£'the world.
For them the mission enterprise was as black as any‘+U"3*
in history.V

The remaining sections of Christendom in Italy

and Greece argued strongly against carrying out
missions in "those cold, northern; barbarian climates."
They referred, of course, to England; Germany,
Scandanavia, Scotland and Ireland. "Island is de-

feating us at every turn," they said, "It is useless

to throw away our resources to carry on missions in

those northern barbaric lands when our own house
needs to be put in order first."

Pessimists, you see, thought they estimated
the situation correctly. They thought their first
task was to tend to the work at homei But in just

350 years,other leaders of the church (what, who and

where were they——Ed.) estimated the situation dif-

Page ten

ierently. They knew they were led by Someone who
had written upon His robes and His thigh the words;
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. They believed
thatyall evidence to the contrary notwithstanding,
they were standing in the sunrise of the enterprise.
And they won the North to the Christian faith!
(What turned the tide?aEd.) Ireland, England;
Scotland, and the low countries. Germany, Denmark
and what is now Sweden, Norway, and Iceland. with
incalculable, beneficient consequences, they won the
North to the Christian faith. Not only for ourselves,
but for all mankind for all time.
Today we too stand at one of these great
hinges of history-+ when it is necessary for us to
formx a correct opinion. But before we can under-
stand what is happening today in Christian mission,
we must go back to l955 to an estimate that wesbeing
made in the early l950's and which found classical
expressions at the great Willingggm conference of

the International Missionary Council. It's well

worth our time to look for a few minutes at the story.

\

Page eleven

/
ta, I/t)V4¢{(/‘J4//LL “'1/74¢
Missions came out of 1- '1, o n s

most optimistic. Protestant missions were with the
a 1
victor nations! It was Protestant géssiggs who had
won the war. And they thought they were going to
f’! I 36.
pick up ex ctly where they left off &£Lé£eé?e§inging
gt//IL’/J-/H’/I/‘--é-4ﬁll’I‘)1fV1 I/\/~ (€46 -' 444¢.r/ fl f‘/?e/}v:ﬂ:<¢-»s ’ ;.(I?/
6T3ﬁbf36?I§3QE1h==%k£t:§;=WEE=é%§§ﬁ¥?£¢. Almost d’lh((
A (400 
overnight over 700,000,0000 people became self

governing.
{ L: (as/V‘/IYMJ ﬂasszssvwf 9'“
Before the war 4ﬁ$¥ had been nulen:as colonies

"ha LL/MS .

had in their own. Almost ngbne bothered with visas
or entrance permits. But then Zgtions like the
Philippﬂnes, India, Burma and Indonesia became inde~
pendent, they became sovereign. And if they didn‘t
want to grant visas to foreigners, they didn't! And
there was nothing one could do about it. The privi~

ledged status of all Europeans, Americans and

missionaries evaporated overnight.
Persecution became a possibility and in many

cases, an actuality. Churches were burned, mission

stations looted, pastors killedgnnational Christians
' wane '

martyred, as in some cases missionaries4slain,‘L““L 5°mc‘

mission hospitals and social service centers were

aeaefizzs burned.

Page twelve

Then in 1948 the Communists conquered China,
then North Vietnam}and then North Korea. It looked
as if all of Asia and Africa was falling to the
Communists. People feared the church would be

liquidated and missions dngveﬁ out. That's the

w_,_,pg,—([ It /-{J
way it looked in<i§52::;l¥;95§h-$heerlike—the

t J. ' - o lam_.
1 (453 /Lb
leaders of Christian missions h%lg,aLp6mi£rqn9e.

a5>—>»@ha7gathered in a place called Willing%g;- //
/K-K://VK ﬁ1/v%5'/“P /({H4/-

in Germany. Their purpose was to estimate enﬂ.judge
whether it was sunrise or sunset in missions)and is
set the guidelines for succeeding decades.
Max Warren, a great Englishman and secretary

of the 6huroh?%&ssionJ§ociety of the Anglican Church,

gave the keynote speech. KE/dignkﬁ/teﬂlgmigaadﬂragg

    

believed/I  - _ ..
‘ﬁlm T4 4 7 '
1947 he future of missions looked bright, but

now at Willington clouds of thick darkness lay

aroun us and we know with complete certainty
/I’?

7-bit: O

    
 

  
 

 
 
 

that he most,5«sn days of the Christian mission

/r<
weee 'ust ahead. '¢We have to be ready to see the

days f missions as we have known them as hlready

havin come to an end," Ke1said«

1

MW

24”‘

xl/{lg

{J

x

n

Y

Page thirteen

V/7(C,:_S.<.. L1rVvp WW.
Ereaty somber estinaisd A dark estimate!

The report of the conference published under the

title, "Missions Under the Cross," pointed out

that missions was in a time of retreat. That we

40
{67 must be prepared for some time as notdhear good news

\

(WK report, "the fruit of missions is flushed down the

U
ﬁv”rW. drain."

of the mission enterprise. "Because," said the

£ﬁd_§ince_l953, up to the present time; a great
deal of high level mission policy in the Prebyterian
GhnIEh;:Ihe Methodist Ghnrch, the‘Lutheran Church,
and the Roman Catholic Church; at home and abroad;

has been decided on the assumption thatnour times

I7w($5””5 -167 ﬂ§‘zT— r1>1~vs5r6¢'I «vm»55r»v~>
ﬂare doomed and—massiona:&re under the cross and_in
. /1
retreat. Missions, therefore, had better not aim

too high or attempt too muoh,beeaase—we—aa4+4yi»

1£sg;a:£ar4§§#éﬁamtzztaznmay.

Now one of the most important things Ghurches,
the leaders of churches and for you as individuals
to face is; what does God want us to do today in the
field of Christian missions? What do you think of
the mission situation now? How greatly have you
been influenced in past days by Vast pessimism with

regard to missions?

Page fourteen

here
During the last few years,imXSxxX and abroad,

you may not have seen much church growth. Perhaps
you feel you are living in a time when the church,
is pretty well closed off. Was the judgement made
by Christian leaders at the Willington.Oonference
right? Are missions Qﬁ§§§:fﬁ§:QiﬁE$5::BU:W8 faceflf
decades of defeat and retreat?
That's the key question! Enxnn I don't know
what you think but,my friends, I want to be quite
clear that you understand what I think! Let me
speak plainly at this point. In my judgement, leaders
at the Willington Conference were wrong! They mis-
read the situation. Oh, it was easy to do. If I‘d
been there I'd have misread it in the same way. But
the events of history simply didnft hear them out.
History went the other way. g%ﬁ;wWMﬁL§3§g;;fQ§g9ast
t t .‘i ' an . atxyayg In the Providence
of God; the things that have happened look very
different.

 ﬁe xnzmnxnz-zn years since Willington

have been years of glorious advance in missions.
They have been years of successful transfer of
authority to younger churches. (ﬁkxxnixxiﬁxi

In 1955, many younger churches in Africa, Latin America

India and other places were nnii dominated by missions.

Page fifteen

But today the younger churches stand on their
9yn.£%é§;: Theyare rulers in their own homes!
Western missionaries now come and go with the
consent of the younger churches. Their assignments
are determined not by a mission board in England,
Canada or America but by leadership from the
national indigenous church.
when I talk of younger churches, I mean

denominations and it is a constant joy for me to

see thousands of churches grow up all over the
world. It is true some are small and weak but others
like the (name) church in Chile mam has

over 300,000 members. Many of the churches in
Latin America and Southeast Asia are large and
independent of Western missionary tutorship.
A quick superficial look at the current
missionary scene leads you to believe that missions

are on the decrease. But if you look closely, you

discover there are more missionaries now than ever

before in history. There are 33,000 Protestant

missionaries from North America alone. If you add
to these the missionaries that go from England,

France, Germany, Scandinavia, India, Japan and the
Bhilippines you begin to get the enormous thrust of

world missions today.

Page sixteen

For many years missionaries were all white
faces. But now, thank God, missionaries are
beginning to be polyglot. Black missionaries

from Ghana, yellow missionaries from Japan and
brown missionaries from India. They come with
their many different tongues. It is true that up
to the present time White missionaries are the
dominant block and because of our affluent
position probably will be for some years to come.
And because of the great things God has given us,
He expects great things from us!

The curve in missions is rising. Today?
missions are more effective than ever before.

At the School of World Missions we do a lot of

historical research. We go back to the beginnings.

Do you know what missionaries were doing a hundred
years ago? They spent be about half ei their time
trying to keep alive; fighting off diseases. When
my grandfather went out to Indian in 1854 it took
him six months to get there. He sailed first from
England, around the Gape of Good Hope, then over
to India and almost lost their lives a half a
dozen times from storms, bad drinking water and
disease. It was more dangerous to go to India in

those days than it is to go to the moon in these!

Page seventeen

Tremendous distances separated the world and
missionaries were not very effective. But today;
they get there quickly. They learn the language
relatively well and relatively quickly. In many
cases they find the Bible translated and can begin
work almost immediately. In addition they find
allies in the younger churches and numbers of

established Christians Often Christian movements

like and are in
are

full operation. I repeat, missions today is more

 

effective and than at any other time in history.‘
There is more Bible translation than ever
before. One hundred and fifty years ago, English
was the only available Scripture in Western languages
at least one portion of the
and in not too manyyof these. But today/ikxx$xiip—
Scriptures x§§ available in axxksastxnnkxpmrtimnxxn almost
l5OO languages. Now 1500 is a quick, easy number
to say but if you have time I would recommend that

you take the time and write down the names of all
the languages you can think of. Do you know what
would happen?- You'd name the first half dozen or
so fairly rapidly. After that there would be long

pauses. Then somebody would say, oh yes, here's

another one and we would pause awhile and someone

Page eighteen

we
else would pop up, and when yen got to 25, we would

have run out of languages. An extraordinary bright
group of people would run out of names of languages
in ten minutes;ﬁtBut after you got through naming
all the languages you could think of, there would be
the Bible in more than 1400 other languages that
you never heard af.wIﬁble translation is needed
more than ever before to instruct the young churches
and expose the mind of Christ through the Scriptures.
All of us need deeply to capture the mind of Christ
as it is revealed in His Word. The things our grand~
fathers and great—grandfathers put up with as in-
evitable now seem to us horrible! Not in the

light of our own ethical insights but in the light
of the mind of Christ.

We don't intend to put up with illiteracy,
racy prejudice, poor prison.oonditions, many of
the terrible things the world is full of. Why?
Because the church of Christ today has recaptured
the mind of Christ! And some people outside of
the church have latched onto this light. Thank God

they are walking in that light! There seems to be

a general level of ethical awareness and sensitivenessb

=Lc70»zZ§ /4Z§f”4y

SUNSET OR SUNRISE IN WORLD MISSION?

by

Dr. Donald A. McGavran

Introduction

The sign of each successful mission.enterprise

is indisputably a strong Vigorous church. But do

we really know how churches grow. Do churches pro-
duce fruit and multiply the same way in every
country? will evangelistic methods that are success-
ful in the U;S. produce the same results in the

What about Congo, Vietnam, Taiwan or
some
In each of these countries/churches grow

Philippines?
India?

and multiply. But others have stopped growing ,

some are stillborn, ethers become.weak and ineffective.

Xithinxthxln these lectures my colleagues and

I will talk from different points of View on why

and how churches grow vigorously or die silently.
Just as our personalities are different, so our
ideas will be different. Some of my colleagues will
discuss the historical and sociological aspects of
thers the anthropological and

world mission.

ecclesiastical angle.

5‘?-c>-o

Page nineteen

for which we can thank God. There are, for example,
more indigenous denominations out beyond those that
mission‘s plant. Not quite as orthodox as one might
hope, but still they call themselves Christians.
They readthe Bible and follow it as closely as they
know how. There's an aggressive, fundamental group
in the Philippines called Excesio Christo with at
least a half million people. And the exciting thing
is they built a million dollar church completely on
their own without a dime from the West.
Africa is full of indigenous denominations.

Dr. David Barrett, the Anglican, sights over 54000
Christian denominations that he says are reasonably
Christian and have arisen outside the church. It
looks to me like there are more go signs in missions
that stop! I think we must look at the mission
picture as a whole. We've got to ask what's going
on in Africa and Latin America as a whole.ttIn l95¢
I made an estimate of the number of Christians in
Africa south of the Sahara»-that is, in animistic
Africa; not Moslem Africa. After considerable cal-
culation I came to the conclusion there were 20,000,000

méiiinn Christians in Africa south of the Sahara-

Page twenty

Now 20,000,000 Christians is a nice figure. It
rolls off the tongue easily. People remember it.
It goes well in a speech. ‘It's impressive. Twenty
million Christians in.Africa south of the Sahara.
And I kept saying that——I%?,,l960, 1965, 1968.
Then in 1968 i said, “Look, I haven't checked on
that for a long time. That's probably not quite
accurate. I better go back and look it up again."
So I made another calculation and I found I was
wrong. There weren't twenty million Christians.
There were 50 million Christians! In those 15
or 20 years, Christians had grown from 20 million
to 50 million—~a 50 million increase! Nothing
like it has been seen in the history of the world.
0h,there were 30 million people in Europe who
became Christians. But it took them thousands of
years to do it. es this £s.happen%g§ in l7 years!
Then Dr. David Barrett, the Anglican researcher,
did a projection like they do in Los Angeles when
they figure how many planes will land at International
Airport in l980. It's a scientific projection, naix
xniatndxnnd the calculations based on present trends.
Dr. Barrett says there are going to be 357 nillion
Christians in Africa in the year 2000! If he's even
half right you and I stand in the midst of a tremen-

dous Christward surge, or a series of surges that

Page twenty—one

are going on in many countries in Africa.
Oh there's defeats here and there. I could
bring #/ in dozens of missionaries who would say
the church in our section of Africa is not growing
at all. That's quite true. But then I could take
you to plenty of other churches in Southern California
who haven't multiplied from l2 to 992 like the Southern
Baptists. This doesn't mean that Southern California
isn't a place you can plant churches. It just means _
that some churches are sitting on their west end.
Or take Latin America. You can go to places
in Latin America where churches are not gowing. Re-
cently Fuller did a three year survey on the growth
of Protestant churches in Latin America. The
Lillian Downten Inca. gave us $54,000 to put three
men to work in every country in Latin American.
You can now buy the outcome of that research in a

book called, "Latin American Church Growth.” It's

angxxxt, accurate, thoughtful account of the growth
of Protestant churches. In essance it says that in
1?§P§li1iX1§¥X1‘EI£$3 XXKE2§JiX1’£3f—'§?X—KIX3§Xl§KJ§l§1Y§X1§2§ﬁXX$XIXE1§!§$

xwenxgxenuxexes xtnexgxxrhsxnt church growth is up

in country after country and people are winable.

Page twenty—two

Steven Neil, the great authority on missions
says, "The growth of churches in the last fifty
years has been startling. Protestantism is without
question the most powerful and transforming spiritual
influence in Latin America today.”
A great many people believe India is closed off.
Well, parts of it are. But there is one province
with 53 million people, almost three times as many
as there are in California, where today there is a
great Christian movement sunnng ahead. And then
Indonesia-—for the first time in history lO0,000
Moslems have become Christians. Since l967 at least
a half million people have been added to the church
in Indonesia. And the Chinese of the disperson.
The Chinese that flooded out of Red China and now
are living in an ark around Taiwan, through the Philip-

pines, Hong Kong, Indonesia, and Burma. TheRChinese

  

__V_‘ .

.':'-““§'=’-1‘-11

     

§g,§;;- are uniquely responsive to the

Christian message. N
And while Red China'has sealed off the mainland

church, the church among the Chinese of the dispersion

is growing- Nearly a fifth of the Chinese, that is

the naturalized Chinese in Indonnsia,have become Christians.

Now I've given you a small part of what I call

I
the sociological evidence to support my belief that

Twenty—three

we are in the sunrise of missions. But I don't

want to leave you with just sociological evidence.
I think a much greater significance is the the
theological evidence: You see, Godkhagmpointed

xzt you and me and all Christians to be ambassadors.

.To beseech people_to be reconciled to God in Christ.

And I believe the God who sent us out as ambassadors
will give us the strength to carry out His command
and appointment. Remember, God commands us straightly
to go and'make disciples of all nations. And will
He who gave us the command, not see to it that His
people, when they pray to Him for strength, will
receive strength to carry out His command? Did
Christ ever send us out on a fruitless mission
and to defeat? I think not. The very fact that
so much of East Africa and Latin America is as
yet undiscipled means that we stand at the beginning
of the enterprise. The main job remains yet to be
done. If you look at it through the eyes of God
He‘s.saying; “Let's rejoice in all of the present
evidences of advance. Let's remember that.the
curtain raiser is over. The ball game is beginning,
and here's where the great turnings are going to take
place." Until those great turnings do take place,

we stand in the sunrise of missions.

twenty~four

)L
_Liu I trust through these agaéﬁzgzlectures that
/ 4’

J

you will see the big View of missions. That you
will not allow minor defeats and minor disappoint-
ments take your mind off the big thing that God is

doing in your generation. And that you.will pray

God to give you the favor of having a decent share‘

in the victory that is now being won and will be

won. Praise God!

 

Méroh 29, 1971

Dr; Hugh Stevens
P.o. Box 1960 _t . V V
Sahté Ana, California 92702

Dear pf. Stovensz

Many thaﬂkn For yours of Mérch.2#th. 0 am glad to know that the

500k pfoject is pr0gre5sih9- The arrangement for royglty seems
ﬁétlﬁfactory to me; ’

I have spent 8 good deal of time with the rather drastic revision

of my-address; On the oﬁo hand, I see the deslrabtlity and neces~

stty for fitting It Into a unified whole and appreciate the.§lantlng
you have dong.

on the other hand, some-thIngs.whtch will have to-stand oxactiy asol
voiced them (for example, the quotation for M.A.C§»Warren)~6nd in
other casea you have popularized a_pfocIse shade of opinion in such

a way that I wouid'not'want It to go out as mine.

You will run.§cross tho'§ao sort of reéotion In the case of other
speakerg also. They will want things prlntod the way they éaid them.

All told, I think the beﬁt way to proceed is to take the manuscript
each glveé you as it comes from the pen of the éuthor. Let him be responsible for what
he sayﬁ; If his-ﬁtatement is not clear, h§ve'him clear it up.‘ -

In case of,a typodfbut script (as ih'the case-of mine) send the type§Cr[pt_a§ It stands
to the Buthbf and let him revise If; Théh treat it as a manu$crlpt, which the oditor
will rétouch-very 1lghtly if at 3}];

Then, you wrlto an Introductory chapter and a conclusion. Thi§,.ahd posslblly a reg
orrangemgnt of the chapters In the Intere§fs_of movement organization, is what will
make ch; anthology 3 book.

could vou than pleaso let me have the script from the tape of my first address? I am
gurg that some of the changes are due to tho typist mlshearlﬁg what the tape said.
There ﬁré some bad bioopers - which must havﬁ gfat¢d.on your eér and no doubt led to
some of the revisions to try and make sense out of them. we simpiy must go back to the
typescrlpt from tho lecture Itself;

_.Ali good wishes;

tﬁordiaily yours In His obedience,

DHG/fj Donald Mceavran

M/J/CZ/FFE 3/51,5 7/M /v5z,4nm5, //V6.

/?0.z9UX/96U- 5/1/L/Z4 ,4/V/4,6141/F0/‘?/V//1 92702 - (714) 547.5525 CU}?/VE/? W/41/V!/7/M/[7 BROADWAY
MMMMH%W7UWN%WHQ%WMlﬂﬂ%HW ~&MMMMW£ﬂ&MH%%UWWlM%U%W

 

March 24, 1971

Dr. Donald McGavran

School of World Mission

Fuller ﬂheological Seminary

135 N. Oakland Ave.
Pasadena, Calif. 91101

Dear Dr. McGavran:

Please forgive me for taking so long to answer
your letter of March 8th but wanted to include
the edited manuscript of your first lecture.

I spoke with Richard Baltzell, editor at Fleming
Revell, about the proposed book. He was interested
and proposes the following:

l. A letter of permission from each of the
people taking part in the lectures.

. 2. .Since there are three major parties in-
volved in the book, namely, John Richardson, who
is handling promotion and initial financing; my-
self as editor; and the School of World Missions,
Baltzell suggests a 40-40-20 split in royalties.

You will notice in your manuscript on pages 8, 9,
l5, and 17 that I have asked for further informa-
tion. I‘ve done a little bit of rewriting which
I believe ties the article together nicely. Also
on page two and three where you_talk about the
four books, I believe this should be included in
the bibliography rather than the manuscript at
this point. In other words, the last paragraph
before naming the books should read, "To help
you get a bigger picture of world missions, I
recommend the books in the bibliography.”

Baltzell feels this volume could be a very ex-
citing missions book. He says there is nothing
on the market currently that could be considered
a good study on missions. He, therefore, would
like each of the men to suggest, as you have done,
additional reading to be included in the biblio-

graphy.

If you agree to these proposals, I will send my
edited copies of each of the lectures to you.’

 

Page two

You can then add or substract as you see fit. I
have Dr. Glasser's and Wagner's lectures which I
will edit and send up to you as soon as I hear

from you regarding your agreement to go ahead
with the project.

In your letter you mentioned uniform chapters

of 4000 words. Your original address was something
like 7000 words which I have out to 5000. It's
difficult for me at this moment to determine the
actual length of each of the forthcoming chapters.
Some of them could conceivably be fairly short
which really would be an advantage. The trend
today is short books and short chapters. All
chapters do not necessarily have to be the same
length. Our object should be to make this as
readable and as attractive as possible so that

the greatest amount of people will get the benefit
of these very excellent ideiigand concepts.

I should also point out thé;woman is transcribing
the tapes is having a problem getting all of the
words transcribed. Therefore, there might be

some discrepancies in your original text.

with regard to the typing of the final manuscript
perhaps your secretary could retype the final
manuscripts in the format that I've enclosed.
That is 2 inch left hand margin, l% inch right
hand margin and l% inches from bottom of page.

If you would then return a copy toriginal) to me,
I will submit the entire manuscript to Baltzell.

I leave for Colombia, Panama and Mexico in mid»
April and would like to have the details worked
out before I leave. I sincerely trust that these
things will be satisfactory to you and your staff.

Looking forward to hearing from you.

Since//ly in Him,
’"/

Hugh Steven
Communications Consultant

HS :nS
Encl.

.£;f:f’

But

central thrust of all Christian mission.

Page two

all of us emphatically emphasize the
That

God's mission to the world must be carried out.

Christian churches around the world are centers

of light, peace, goodness and justice.

No church

 '

or group of believers has the right to rest or look

contentedly at the vast communities of the world

who are still without a knowledge of the Saviour.

To help you get a bigger picture of world

missions,

 

}~ca.c(’ @ épygr an/~ ‘V’!/(S'{{/-'xA§/_fl/(C//Z
A ~ '/$292 ‘hﬂev ’”“' “r 41.

Student Power and World 'vangeliza 10:

by David M. Howard, Interﬂhrsity felt
this book to be so important they gave
it to over 12,000 students and mission-
aries during Urbana 70.

Twenty—five Unbelievable Years by Dr.

Ralph Winter. The past 25 years of
mission history has been unusually ex«

citing and important.

My book, How Churches Grow. In.l937
SobCﬂ\€r-n
thenBaptists Cﬁﬁﬁffﬁépiisisﬁt had l2

churches in Southern California. They

currently have 992.

£/'/?f,§4[

‘ V

\

mnf

How did they do it?‘

Page three

4. Do Churches Grow? also by myself.? Talks

 

__,..——-

abo t the institutional form. We really

    
    
   
   
 

don't eed classrooms, florescen lights,

necessity on a rainy morning! In some

places the ch ch ‘ a prayer meeting,

Christian cell groups r a large elegant
buildixg In whateverif the institution,

Goa/has/a plan for its growthh

-X--)(--X--X-9. *-)(--)6--}{-*9£-

T ‘u 0 our . What do we

face in Christian mission? Before I answer this we

must ask ourselves, what is Christian mission?
Dr. Arthur Glasser will discuss a different

aspect of this same question in the following lecture.
There are two general opinions on what is Christian

mission. One is that Christian.mission of the church

is g£ég§_everything God tglg it to do.
The other is doing everything God wants it to

do. This is a broad definition but I believe it takes
in God’s complete mission for His church.

Most of us hnxnxﬁniax believe there needs to
be more justice and much more hrotherhood in the
world. That racial antipathies, injustices, grinding

poverty, ill health, illiteracy and the terriﬁle pre-

Page four

ventable diseases that riddle mankind are not
pleasing to God. We know t§a$a§§r$E§?'the church's
task is to work in our own personal lives, in the
lives of our families, neighborhood, P.T.A., civic
organizations, businesses, farms, in the entire
country and across the seas. This is God's plan-
and He wants it done. But in addition we must

java:-; a,_
understand that each or us have beenlspeciftﬁﬁéég

‘ Jmcsk

. oea£an&m%'m)§gy

Man is not just reconciled vertically with
God. There must also be a horizontal reconciliation
of man with man. At the School of World Mission
we believe the Vertical reconciliation must come
first. Because}without a deep personal recon-
ciliation there can never be a lasting fruitful
reconciliation between one's neighbor.
when our Lord gave the Great Commission, He
gave it in a certain order. "All authority," he

said, "has been given to me in heaven and on

earth. Go therefore and make the nations disciples
of the Lord Jesus Christ, baptizing them in the

name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.”

Page five

After bringing them into a right relationship
with God, the source of all supply, He goes on to
say, "teach them all things.” ‘What are these things?
They are kindness, goodness, justice, brotherhood,
and the many other things this world so desperately
needs.

That's what mission is! And that's what we're
going to talk about. Now we must ask the question,
what kind of program does the church have today?
The church has a magnificent program! The Christian
mission of the church around the world reaches into

almost every compartment of life. Every sending
church with-missionaries knows something about what
it means to be involved with missions.

Reports from Ethiopia, Brazil, Iran and many
other countries indicate that God is doing a tre-

mendous work. It's also exciting to observe

service organizations like Missionary Aviation
Fellowship as they bring churches together with
their program of aviation. And consider Wycliffe
Bible Translators. They are doing a superb job of
translating the Scriptures and makéwthe Word of
God available to people whose languages have never

been reduced to writing..

Page six

Are you aware of these programs? Most are net.
People in Southern California think they know their
State. But most havenft seen a tenth of it. And
out beyond this tenth part of their world is a vast
unclaimed world that God wants us to claim for Christ.

West Cameroons is one of these places. It is
a country in West Africa about the size of California.
The difference is that it has thirty—seven different
mutually exclusive languages—~little pockets of people,
5,000, 50,000 and 75,000. Some live in forests?
others in the high; grassy, mountain country. And

all must be evangelized.

From the Cameroons let us move to India, a
country larger than France, Germany and England and
with more people than the three countries combined.

?;—Fteen
And then we think of the church in India. 15 million
Christians scattered throughout a population of over
500,000,000.

In Africa, south of the Sahara there are 50,000,000
Christians.‘ when you consider what this means in terms
of workers; Sunday School classes; churches, ministers,
ministerial training_centers and Christian organizations,

you will catch a glimpse of the complexity and enormity

of the missionary enterprise.

.,—.4—....

Page seven
But then someone says, "Yes, but we've heard

that the missionary enterprise is not getting along

Very well.”V We've heard it's difficult to get into India.

And that visas are denied and churches are cutting
down on the number of missionaries. And that people
are writing books called, ‘Missionaries Go Home.’
Missionaries are no longer popular."

There is strong pessimism running through the
Christian world today about the future of missions.
How about this? What is the real situation? If oyr
Lord commanded us to go and disciple the nations,
to reconcile man to God in Christ, how do we get

on with the job? What should we be doing about it?
Should you plan for your sons and your daughters to
be missionaries? It is not that you should push
them into mission service but you could pray for it.
Are you, for instance, praying that your best son,
that brightest boy of yours, become a missionary

of the Gospel? would you regard it as God's

greatest gift to you if he were to say to you
someday, "Mother, Dad...-you know, l've decided to
be a missionary." Would you say, "Oh, sont Oh
no, no! Not that!" What would you do? What does
God want you to do in regard to the eﬁangelization

of the world and the Christian mission to the world?

Page eight

Obeying God usually depends both on God's
will and our understanding and assessment of the
situation. Consequently, it‘s of very great im~
portance for us to stop at the beginning'of this
series of lectures and form some judgement as to
the situation that faces each of us. Is it sunrise
or is it sunset? Where do we really stand in the
Christian mission enterprise.

Let me give you an example of this right out
of Christian history. Between the years 660 A.D.
and 1000 A.D., Islam came boiling up out of Arabia
wiping out Christianity in the very lands where it
originated. In & (datet Palestine was one
of the first to fall to the mounted invaders.

Then came Syria in the East and Egypt in the West.
Between and (dates) North Africa,

. SW50 .
Mesopotamia, Spaazsh and Persia fell. By

a gigantic Moslem empire stretched from India to

the Atlantic.

é’ Christian stronghold after Christian strong-
hold oapitulated——Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria,
Carthage, Damascus. All became centers of Islamic

lore, eaoh.with its minaret_and madrasah.

